Introduction to Deep Learning Last Updated : 09 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Deep Learning is transforming the way machines understand, learn, and interact with complex data. Deep learning mimics neural networks of the human brain, it enables computers to autonomously uncover patterns and make informed decisions from vast amounts of unstructured data. Introduction to Deep Learning Deep Learning leverages artificial neural networks ANNs to process and learn from complex data. How Deep Learning Works ? Neural network consists of layers of interconnected nodes, or neurons, that collaborate to process input data. In a fully connected deep neural network , data flows through multiple layers, where each neuron performs nonlinear transformations, allowing the model to learn intricate representations of the data. In a deep neural network, the input layer receives data, which passes through hidden layers that transform the data using nonlinear functions. The final output layer generates the models prediction. Fully Connected Deep Neural Network Deep Learning in Machine Learning Paradigms Supervised Learning : Neural networks learn from labeled data to predict or classify, using algorithms like CNNs and RNNs for tasks such as image recognition and language translation. Unsupervised Learning : Neural networks identify patterns in unlabeled data, using techniques like Autoencoders and Generative Models for tasks like clustering and anomaly detection. Reinforcement Learning : An agent learns to make decisions by maximizing rewards, with algorithms like DQN and DDPG applied in areas like robotics and game playing. Difference between Machine Learning and Deep Learning Machine learning and Deep Learning both are subsets of artificial intelligence but there are many similarities and differences between them. Machine Learning Deep Learning Apply statistical algorithms to learn the hidden patterns and relationships in the dataset. Uses artificial neural network architecture to learn the hidden patterns and relationships in the dataset. Can work on the smaller amount of dataset Requires the larger volume of dataset compared to machine learning Better for the low-label task. Better for complex task like image processing, natural language processing, etc. Takes less time to train the model. Takes more time to train the model. A model is created by relevant features which are manually extracted from images to detect an object in the image. Relevant features are automatically extracted from images. It is an end-to-end learning process. Less complex and easy to interpret the result. More complex, it works like the black

the model. A model is created by relevant features which are manually extracted from images to detect an object in the image. Relevant features are automatically extracted from images. It is an end-to-end learning process. Less complex and easy to interpret the result. More complex, it works like the black box interpretations of the result are not easy. It can work on the CPU or requires less computing power as compared to deep learning. It requires a high-performance computer with GPU. Evolution of Neural Architectures The journey of deep learning began with the perceptron , a single-layer neural network introduced in the 1950s. While innovative, perceptrons could only solve linearly separable problems, failing at more complex tasks like the XOR problem. This limitation led to the development of Multi-Layer Perceptrons MLPs . It introduced hidden layers and non-linear activation functions. MLPs, trained using backpropagation , could model complex, non-linear relationships, marking a significant leap in neural network capabilities. This evolution from perceptrons to MLPs laid the groundwork for advanced architectures like CNNs and RNNs, showcasing the power of layered structures in solving real-world problems. Types of neural networks 1. Feedforward neural networks FNNs are the simplest type of ANN, where data flows in one direction from input to output. It is used for basic tasks like classification. 2. Convolutional Neural Networks CNNs are specialized for processing grid-like data, such as images. CNNs use convolutional layers to detect spatial hierarchies, making them ideal for computer vision tasks. 3. Recurrent Neural Networks RNNs are able to process sequential data, such as time series and natural language. RNNs have loops to retain information over time, enabling applications like language modeling and speech recognition. Variants like LSTMs and GRUs address vanishing gradient issues. 4. Generative Adversarial Networks GANs consist of two networksa generator and a discriminatorthat compete to create realistic data. GANs are widely used for image generation, style transfer, and data augmentation. 5. Autoencoders are unsupervised networks that learn efficient data encodings. They compress input data into a latent representation and reconstruct it, useful for dimensionality reduction and anomaly detection. 6. Transformer Networks has revolutionized NLP with self-attention mechanisms. Transformers excel at tasks like translation, text generation, and sentiment analysis, powering models like GPT and BERT. Deep Learning Applications 1. Computer vision In computer vision, deep learning models enable machines to identify and understand visual data. Some of the main applications of deep

has revolutionized NLP with self-attention mechanisms. Transformers excel at tasks like translation, text generation, and sentiment analysis, powering models like GPT and BERT. Deep Learning Applications 1. Computer vision In computer vision, deep learning models enable machines to identify and understand visual data. Some of the main applications of deep learning in computer vision include: Object detection and recognition : Deep learning models are used to identify and locate objects within images and videos, making it possible for machines to perform tasks such as self-driving cars, surveillance, and robotics. Image classification : Deep learning models can be used to classify images into categories such as animals, plants, and buildings. This is used in applications such as medical imaging, quality control, and image retrieval. Image segmentation : Deep learning models can be used for image segmentation into different regions, making it possible to identify specific features within images. 2. Natural language processing NLP In NLP, deep learning model enable machines to understand and generate human language. Some of the main applications of deep learning in NLP include: Automatic Text Generation: Deep learning model can learn the corpus of text and new text like summaries, essays can be automatically generated using these trained models. Language translation : Deep learning models can translate text from one language to another, making it possible to communicate with people from different linguistic backgrounds. Sentiment analysis : Deep learning models can analyze the sentiment of a piece of text, making it possible to determine whether the text is positive, negative, or neutral. Speech recognition: Deep learning models can recognize and transcribe spoken words, making it possible to perform tasks such as speech-to-text conversion, voice search, and voice-controlled devices. 3. Reinforcement learning In reinforcement learning, deep learning works as training agents to take action in an environment to maximize a reward. Some of the main applications of deep learning in reinforcement learning include: Game playing : Deep reinforcement learning models have been able to beat human experts at games such as Go, Chess, and Atari. Robotics : Deep reinforcement learning models can be used to train robots to perform complex tasks such as grasping objects, navigation, and manipulation. Control systems : Deep reinforcement learning models can be used to control complex systems such as power grids, traffic management, and supply chain optimization. Challenges in Deep Learning Deep learning has made significant advancements in various fields, but there are

perform complex tasks such as grasping objects, navigation, and manipulation. Control systems : Deep reinforcement learning models can be used to control complex systems such as power grids, traffic management, and supply chain optimization. Challenges in Deep Learning Deep learning has made significant advancements in various fields, but there are still some challenges that need to be addressed. Here are some of the main challenges in deep learning: Data availability : It requires large amounts of data to learn from. For using deep learning its a big concern to gather as much data for training. Computational Resources : For training the deep learning model, it is computationally expensive because it requires specialized hardware like GPUs and TPUs. Time-consuming: While working on sequential data depending on the computational resource it can take very large even in days or months. I nterpretability: Deep learning models are complex, it works like a black box. it is very difficult to interpret the result. Overfitting: when the model is trained again and again, it becomes too specialized for the training data, leading to overfitting and poor performance on new data. Advantages of Deep Learning High accuracy: Deep Learning algorithms can achieve state-of-the-art performance in various tasks, such as image recognition and natural language processing. Automated feature engineering: Deep Learning algorithms can automatically discover and learn relevant features from data without the need for manual feature engineering. Scalability: Deep Learning models can scale to handle large and complex datasets, and can learn from massive amounts of data. Flexibility: Deep Learning models can be applied to a wide range of tasks and can handle various types of data, such as images, text, and speech. Continual improvement: Deep Learning models can continually improve their performance as more data becomes available. Disadvantages of Deep Learning High computational requirements: Deep Learning AI models require large amounts of data and computational resources to train and optimize. Requires large amounts of labeled data : Deep Learning models often require a large amount of labeled data for training, which can be expensive and time- consuming to acquire. Interpretability: Deep Learning models can be challenging to interpret, making it difficult to understand how they make decisions. Overfitting: Deep Learning models can sometimes overfit to the training data, resulting in poor performance on new and unseen data. Black-box nature : Deep Learning models are often treated as black boxes, making it difficult to understand how

Top Machine Learning CareersJobs Last Updated : 21 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Machine Learning ML is one of the fastest-growing fields in technology, driving innovations across healthcare, finance, e-commerce, and more. As companies increasingly adopt AI-based solutions, the demand for skilled ML professionals is Soaring. Machine Learning Jobs This article delves into the Type of Machine Learning available Jobs, key roles, required skills, industries and salary. Why is Machine Learning Important? By using ML, companies are able to make smarter decisions, boost efficiency in comparatively less time, and create more personalized customer experiences. Below are some of the reasons which makes Machine Learning important Harnessing Vast Data : Companies use ML to analyze massive datasets and uncover actionable insights that were previously impossible to detect. Automation of Processes : ML automates repetitive tasks, streamlining operations and reducing human errors, leading to increased efficiency. Personalized Customer Experiences : ML models power recommendation systems and targeted marketing campaigns, enhancing user engagement and satisfaction. Real-Time Decision Making : ML enables real-time applications like fraud detection, dynamic pricing, and autonomous vehicles, where quick responses are essential. Simplified Deployment with Cloud Platforms : Tools like AWS , TensorFlow , and PyTorch make it easier for organizations to develop, deploy, and scale ML models. Top Career Paths in Machine Learning Machine Learning is very popular mentioned above! as it reduces a lot of human efforts and increases machine performance by enabling machines to learn for themselves. Consequently, many career paths in Machine Learning are popular and well-paying such as Machine Learning Engineer, Data Scientist, NLP Scientist, etc. 1. Machine Learning Engineer Machine Learning Engineers are responsible for developing and deploying ML models that power everything from recommendation systems Netflixs to self-driving cars and voice-controlled virtual assistants like Siri or Alexa. . This role requires a blend of strong programming skills and a deep understanding of algorithms and mathematics. Role Responsibilities: Build, test, and deploy ML models. Optimize algorithms for speed and accuracy. Integrate models with software applications. Monitor and maintain models in production environments. Collaborate with data scientists and software engineers to align solutions with business goals. Why Choose This Path? Highly Technical and Hands-On Role: Ideal for those who enjoy coding and solving mathematical challenges. Work on Real-World Solutions: Youll build models that have a direct impact on user experiences. In-Demand Career Path: ML Engineers are highly sought after

engineers to align solutions with business goals. Why Choose This Path? Highly Technical and Hands-On Role: Ideal for those who enjoy coding and solving mathematical challenges. Work on Real-World Solutions: Youll build models that have a direct impact on user experiences. In-Demand Career Path: ML Engineers are highly sought after due to the rise of AI-powered applications. You can also refer to How to become a Machine Learning Engineer 2. Data Scientist Data Scientists are detective of the data world, they extract insights from data and create models to predict outcomes. Working across industriesfrom finance to healthcare Data Scientists are integral in designing experiments, analyzing large amounts of data, and ultimately presenting findings that can guide strategic decisions. Role Responsibilities: Clean, preprocess, and analyze large datasets. Develop predictive models using ML algorithms. Visualize data to present insights to business stakeholders. Design experiments to validate hypotheses. Collaborate with business teams to align insights with strategies Why Choose This Path? Blend of Technical and Business Skills: Ideal for those who enjoy working with data to solve business problems. High Impact on Business Decisions: Your insights will directly influence key strategies. Versatile Opportunities: Data Scientists are in demand across industries like finance, healthcare, and retail. You can refer to How to become a Data Scientist 3. AIML Research Scientist AIML Research Scientists work on cutting-edge technologies like deep learning, NLP , and computer vision. They push the boundaries of whats possible by experimenting with new algorithms and architectures. Unlike traditional software roles, AIML Research Scientists often work on projects that take years to complete but have the potential to make a significant impact once theyre ready for deployment. Role Responsibilities: Conduct research on novel ML algorithms and techniques. Publish research findings in academic journals and conferences. Collaborate with industry and academic partners on innovative projects. Develop and prototype new architectures for AI models. Why Choose This Path? Explore Cutting-Edge Technology: This role is perfect for those passionate about solving complex technical challenges. Opportunity to Contribute to Innovation: Your work will shape the future of AI technologies. Collaborative Environment: Work alongside leading experts in academia and industry. You can refer to How to become a AIML Research Scientist 4. NLP Engineer Natural Language Processing NLP Engineers work on understanding, analyzing, and generating human language to build smart conversational systems and language models. They enable machines to communicate with humans in natural language, which powers

academia and industry. You can refer to How to become a AIML Research Scientist 4. NLP Engineer Natural Language Processing NLP Engineers work on understanding, analyzing, and generating human language to build smart conversational systems and language models. They enable machines to communicate with humans in natural language, which powers technologies like voice assistants, chatbots, and translation systems. Role Responsibilities: Develop chatbots and virtual assistants. Build sentiment analysis and language translation models. Train NLP models using datasets with text data. Fine-tune transformer-based models like BERT and GPT. Why Choose This Path? High Demand for NLP Solutions: NLP powers voice assistants, translation tools, and chatbots. Opportunity to Work Across Industries: From customer service to healthcare, NLP engineers are in high demand. Evolving Field: This role offers continuous learning as new language models emerge. You can refer to How to become NLP Engineer 5. Computer Vision Engineer Computer Vision Engineers develop ML models that interpret visual data from images and videos, enabling applications like autonomous vehicles and facial recognition systems. Their work combines aspects of machine learning, image processing, and robotics, making it one of the most technically challenging and exciting fields within AI. Role Responsibilities: Develop object detection , classification , and facial recognition models. Create models for autonomous vehicles and drone navigation. Optimize computer vision systems for real-time performance. Work with large-scale image and video datasets. Why Choose This Path? Work on Futuristic Technologies: Ideal for those excited by autonomous systems and surveillance technologies. Impact Across Multiple Domains: From automotive to healthcare, computer vision plays a crucial role. Diverse Applications: Opportunities range from self-driving cars to advanced imaging systems. You can refer to How to Become a Computer Vision Engineer? 6. MLOps Engineer MLOps Machine Learning Operations Engineers automate the deployment, monitoring, and maintenance of ML models, ensuring seamless operation. MLOps Engineers bridge the gap between machine learning and operations DevOps, making them key players in modern AI-driven enterprises that need robust, scalable, and automated ML solutions. Role Responsibilities: Develop CICD pipelines to automate model deployment. Monitor models for performance degradation and drift. Integrate models with cloud platforms for scalability. Collaborate with DevOps teams for production-grade solutions. Why Choose This Path? Growing Field: MLOps is essential for scaling ML models in production. Combination of ML and DevOps Skills: Offers a unique and sought-after skillset. Continuous Innovation: Work with cutting-edge cloud and automation tools. 7. Big Data Engineer Big Data Engineers

Collaborate with DevOps teams for production-grade solutions. Why Choose This Path? Growing Field: MLOps is essential for scaling ML models in production. Combination of ML and DevOps Skills: Offers a unique and sought-after skillset. Continuous Innovation: Work with cutting-edge cloud and automation tools. 7. Big Data Engineer Big Data Engineers design the infrastructure required to handle massive datasets, making ML applications scalable and efficient.They work with technologies like Hadoop, Spark, and Kafka to build data pipelines that ensure ML models have access to clean, scalable, and real-time data. Role Responsibilities: Build and maintain data pipelines for ML workflows. Manage distributed computing tools like Hadoop and Spark. Ensure data quality and integrity for ML projects. Collaborate with data scientists to prepare datasets for model training. Why Choose This Path? Work at the Intersection of Big Data and AI: Crucial for scaling ML applications. High Demand Across Industries: From e-commerce to finance, data engineers are in demand. Opportunity to Build Scalable Solutions: Design infrastructures that process billions of data points. 8. ML Product Manager ML Product Managers guide the development and delivery of AIML products, ensuring they align with business goals. This role requires a unique blend of technical knowledge and strategic vision, making it ideal for those interested in both the technical and business aspects of AI. Role Responsibilities: Define product roadmaps and prioritize features. Coordinate between engineering, data science, and business teams. Ensure ML solutions align with business goals and user needs. Monitor product performance post-launch. Why Choose This Path? Blend Business and Technical Skills: Ideal for those interested in both strategy and technology. Leadership Role: Youll have a direct impact on product development. Opportunity to Manage AI Products: Lead projects that shape the future of technology. 9. Data Engineer Data Engineers provide the infrastructure needed for ML engineers and data scientists to develop and test models effectively. This role is important in ensuring the smooth flow of data in real-time and optimizing its storage and retrieval for analytics and business intelligence purposes. Role Responsibilities: Design scalable data architectures for ML pipelines. Ensure data availability and quality. Use tools like Airflow and Spark for data orchestration. Manage databases and data warehouses. Why Choose This Path? Crucial Role in ML Ecosystem: Your work ensures data flows smoothly for ML projects. Opportunities Across Industries: Data engineers are needed in every sector that relies on data. Continuous Learning: Work with cutting-edge data technologies

Airflow and Spark for data orchestration. Manage databases and data warehouses. Why Choose This Path? Crucial Role in ML Ecosystem: Your work ensures data flows smoothly for ML projects. Opportunities Across Industries: Data engineers are needed in every sector that relies on data. Continuous Learning: Work with cutting-edge data technologies and architectures. You can refer to How to Become a Data Engineer? 10. AI Consultant AI Consultants help businesses adopt and implement MLAI technologies to improve operations and drive innovation. AI Consultants are also involved in the implementation phase, helping businesses ensure that their AI projects are aligned with overall goals and deliver measurable ROI. Role Responsibilities: Advise clients on ML tools and practices. Create prototypes and proof-of-concepts POCs for AI solutions. Identify areas where AI can add value to the business. Collaborate with stakeholders to implement AI strategies. Why Choose This Path? High-Impact Role: Help businesses drive innovation through AI. Flexible Career Path: Consultants often enjoy autonomy and diverse projects. Opportunity to Work with Top Companies: Collaborate with leading firms across industries. 11. Robotics Engineer Robotics Engineers develop intelligent robots and autonomous systems, using ML models for decision-making and vision systems. These professionals combine skills in mechanical engineering, control systems, and AI to create robots that can perform tasks without constant human oversight. Role Responsibilities: Develop algorithms for robot vision and motion planning. Work with sensors to collect and process data for training. Implement ML models for autonomous decision-making Why Choose This Path? Cutting-Edge Technology: Build robots that interact with the real world. Opportunities Across Multiple Industries: Robotics is booming in healthcare, logistics, and manufacturing.. Creative Problem Solving: This role involves both software and hardware development. You can refer to How to become a Robotics Engineer 12. Autonomous Vehicle Engineer Autonomous Vehicle Engineers build algorithms and models that enable vehicles to navigate and operate independently. Role Responsibilities: Develop computer vision systems for object detection and tracking. Train reinforcement learning models for navigation. Integrate LiDAR, radar, and camera data for decision-making. Why Choose This Path? Be Part of Revolutionary Technology: Contribute to the development of self-driving cars. Work on Real-World Applications: Your work will directly impact transportation and safety. High-Paying Career Path: Autonomous vehicle engineers are in high demand globally. Machine Learning Career Opportunities Role Key Skills Average Salary INR per year Average Salary USD per year Industries Machine Learning Engineer Python, TensorFlow, PyTorch, Scikit-learn, Model Deployment 8-15 LPA 110,000

Applications: Your work will directly impact transportation and safety. High-Paying Career Path: Autonomous vehicle engineers are in high demand globally. Machine Learning Career Opportunities Role Key Skills Average Salary INR per year Average Salary USD per year Industries Machine Learning Engineer Python, TensorFlow, PyTorch, Scikit-learn, Model Deployment 8-15 LPA 110,000 150,000 IT, Finance, Healthcare, E-commerce Data Scientist Python, R, SQL, ML Algorithms, Data Visualization 10-18 LPA 100,000 140,000 Finance, Retail, Healthcare, Telecom AIML Research Scientist Deep Learning, NLP, Computer Vision, Research Methodologies 12-22 LPA 120,000 180,000 Academia, RD Labs, Big Tech NLP Engineer NLP Frameworks BERT, GPT, Python, Linguistics, Transformers 10-20 LPA 110,000 160,000 Customer Service, Healthcare, Fintech Computer Vision Engineer OpenCV, TensorFlow, CNNs, Real-Time Image Processing 10-18 LPA 110,000 150,000 Automotive, Surveillance, Healthcare MLOps Engineer Docker, Kubernetes, CICD, Cloud Platforms AWS, GCP, Azure 8-16 LPA 100,000 140,000 IT, E-commerce, SaaS, Fintech Big Data Engineer for ML Hadoop, Spark, Data Pipelines, Distributed Systems 10-18 LPA 100,000 140,000 Finance, IT, E-commerce, Telecom ML Product Manager Product Management, ML Basics, Agile, Stakeholder Management 15-25 LPA 130,000 180,000 IT, SaaS, E-commerce, AI Startups Data Engineer SQL, Python, ETL, Data Warehousing Airflow, Snowflake 8-14 LPA 100,000 130,000 Finance, Telecom, E-commerce, Retail AI Consultant ML Tools, Business Strategy, Prototyping, AI Adoption 15-30 LPA 140,000 200,000 Consulting, IT, Healthcare, Retail Robotics Engineer ROS, Sensors, Python, Robot Vision, Motion Planning 10-20 LPA 110,000 150,000 Manufacturing, Healthcare, Logistics Autonomous Vehicle Engineer LiDAR, Radar, Reinforcement Learning, Autonomous Systems 15-30 LPA 140,000 200,000 Automotive, Transportation, Defense Conclusion The field of machine learning offers diverse career opportunities, catering to various interests, from hands-on engineering roles to research and consultancy. Whether you aspire to build cutting-edge models, manage large-scale data infrastructure, or lead product development, there is a role that aligns with your passion. Machine learning is not just about algorithms it drives real-world impact across industries like healthcare, finance, automotive, and e-commerce. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Difference Between Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence harkiran78 Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS AI-ML-DS Blogs GBlog Machine Learning TechTips Career-Advices GBlog 2024 Machine Learning Blogs python 5 More Practice Tags : Machine Learning python

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Artificial Intelligence Ittsmk Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos Artificial Intelligence Artificial Intelligence Ittsmk 13:25 12.2K Views 06122024 ... Transformers in Machine Learning Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence 10:33 1.0K Views 06122024 ... Types of Neural Networks Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence 09:20 1.9K Views 06122024 ... What is Neural Networks Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence 06:19 7.6K Views 06122024 ... Introduction of Generative AI Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence 19:03 16.8K Views 27052024 ... Getting started with Regular Expressions Natural Language Processing NLP , Artificial Intelligence 01:01 1.7K Views 02042024 ... Prompt Engineering Artificial Intelligence AI Revolution Job , career-guidance , tech-tips , Artificial Intelligence Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science

Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

AI, ML and Data Science Tutorial - Learn AI, ML and Data Science Last Updated : 21 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report This article covers everything you need to learn about AI, ML and Data Science, starting with Python programming and math concepts like statistics and probability. You'll explore Exploratory Data Analysis EDA, Data Analysis and Data Visualization, Machine Learning, Deep Learning and Artificial Intelligence. Additionally, it includes interview questions, tutorials and projects to help you apply your knowledge and prepare for a career in AI, ML and Data Science. 1. Learn Python Python is one of the most popular programming languages today, known for its simplicity, extensive features and library support. Its clean syntax makes it beginner-friendly, while its libraries and frameworks makes it perfect for developers. Python Tutorial Python Quizzes Python Interview Questions 2. Math For Data Science Math for Data Science is all about the fundamental mathematical tools and concepts you need to work effectively with data. It includes Statistics Probability, Linear Algebra and Calculus. Linear Algebra for Data Science Statistics for Data Science Probability for Data Science Calculus for Data Science Practice Linear Algebra , Statistics , Probability and Calculus 3. Exploratory Data Analysis Exploratory Data Analysis EDA is an approach to analyzing data sets to summarize their main characteristics, often using visual methods. It involves understanding data, cleaning data, visualizing data and further analysis. Exploratory Data Analysis or EDA EDA with NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib and Seaborn 4. Data Analysis Data Analysis is the technique of collecting, transforming and organizing data to make future predictions and informed data-driven decisions. It also helps to find possible solutions for a business problem. There are six steps for Data Analysis which are: Ask or Specify Data Requirements, Prepare or Collect Data, Clean and Process, Analyze, Share, Act or Report. Data Analysis Data Analytics Projects Data Analysis Quiz Data Analytics Interview Questions 5. Data Visualization Data visualization is the process of turning data into visual representations like charts, graphs and maps. It helps us understand trends, patterns and outliers. Data Visualization Tutorial Data Visualization Projects Data Visualization Quiz Data Visualization Interview Questions 6. Machine Learning Machine learning is a subset of Artificial Intelligence AI that enables computers to learn from data and make predictions without being explicitly programmed. It can be categorized into three types: Supervised Learning, Unsupervised Learning and Reinforcement Learning. Machine Learning Tutorial

Data Visualization Quiz Data Visualization Interview Questions 6. Machine Learning Machine learning is a subset of Artificial Intelligence AI that enables computers to learn from data and make predictions without being explicitly programmed. It can be categorized into three types: Supervised Learning, Unsupervised Learning and Reinforcement Learning. Machine Learning Tutorial Machine Learning Projects Machine Learning Quiz Machine Learning Interview Questions 7. Data Science with Python Data science enables organizations to make informed decisions, solve problems and understand human behavior. As the volume of data grows, so does the demand for skilled data scientists. The most common languages used for data science are Python and R, with Python being particularly popular. Data Science Tutorial Data Science Projects Data Science Quiz Data Science Interview Questions 8. Deep Learning Deep Learning is a branch of Artificial Intelligence AI that enables machines to learn from large amounts of data. It uses neural networks with many layers to automatically find patterns and make predictions. Deep Learning Tutorial Deep Learning Projects Deep Learning Quiz Deep Learning Interview Questions 9. Artificial Intelligence Artificial Intelligence AI refers to the simulation of human intelligence in machines that are programmed to think and act like humans. AI Tutorial AI Interview Questions AI Projects AI-ML-DS Interview Questions The AI-ML-DS Interview Series is an essential resource designed for individuals aspiring to start or switch careers in the fields of Artificial Intelligence AI, Machine Learning ML and Data Science DS. AI-ML-DS Interview Series Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Data Science Vs. Artificial Intelligence: Understanding the Key Differences A anuragtriarna Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS

What is a Neural Network? Last Updated : 03 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Neural networks are machine learning models that mimic the complex functions of the human brain. These models consist of interconnected nodes or neurons that process data, learn patterns, and enable tasks such as pattern recognition and decision-making. In this article, we will explore the fundamentals of neural networks, their architecture, how they work, and their applications in various fields. Understanding neural networks is essential for anyone interested in the advancements of artificial intelligence. Understanding Neural Networks in Deep Learning Neural networks are capable of learning and identifying patterns directly from data without pre-defined rules. These networks are built from several key components: Neurons : The basic units that receive inputs, each neuron is governed by a threshold and an activation function. Connections : Links between neurons that carry information, regulated by weights and biases. Weights and Biases : These parameters determine the strength and influence of connections. Propagation Functions : Mechanisms that help process and transfer data across layers of neurons. Learning Rule : The method that adjusts weights and biases over time to improve accuracy. Learning in neural networks follows a structured, three-stage process: Input Computation : Data is fed into the network. Output Generation : Based on the current parameters, the network generates an output. Iterative Refinement : The network refines its output by adjusting weights and biases, gradually improving its performance on diverse tasks. In an adaptive learning environment: The neural network is exposed to a simulated scenario or dataset. Parameters such as weights and biases are updated in response to new data or conditions. With each adjustment, the networks response evolves, allowing it to adapt effectively to different tasks or environments. The image illustrates the analogy between a biological neuron and an artificial neuron, showing how inputs are received and processed to produce outputs in both systems. Importance of Neural Networks Neural networks are pivotal in identifying complex patterns, solving intricate challenges, and adapting to dynamic environments. Their ability to learn from vast amounts of data is transformative, impacting technologies like natural language processing , self-driving vehicles , and automated decision-making . Neural networks streamline processes, increase efficiency, and support decision-making across various industries. As a backbone of artificial intelligence, they continue to drive innovation, shaping the future of technology. Evolution of Neural Networks Neural networks have

transformative, impacting technologies like natural language processing , self-driving vehicles , and automated decision-making . Neural networks streamline processes, increase efficiency, and support decision-making across various industries. As a backbone of artificial intelligence, they continue to drive innovation, shaping the future of technology. Evolution of Neural Networks Neural networks have undergone significant evolution since their inception in the mid-20th century. Heres a concise timeline of the major developments in the field: 1940s-1950s : The concept of neural networks began with McCulloch and Pitts introduction of the first mathematical model for artificial neurons . However, the lack of computational power during that time posed significant challenges to further advancements. 1960s-1970s : Frank Rosenblatts worked on perceptrons. Perceptrons are simple single-layer networks that can solve linearly separable problems, but can not perform complex tasks. 1980s: The development of backpropagation by Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams revolutionized neural networks by enabling the training of multi-layer networks . This period also saw the rise of connectionism, emphasizing learning through interconnected nodes. 1990s: Neural networks experienced a surge in popularity with applications across image recognition, finance, and more. However, this growth was tempered by a period known as the AI winter, during which high computational costs and unrealistic expectations dampened progress. 2000s: A resurgence was triggered by the availability of larger datasets, advances in computational power, and innovative network architectures. Deep learning, utilizing multiple layers, proved highly effective across various domains. 2010s: The landscape of machine learning has been dominated by deep learning with CNNs Convolutional Neural Networks excelling in image classification and RNNs Recurrent Neural Networks , LSTMs , and GRUs gaining traction in sequence-based tasks like language modeling and speech recognition. 2017: Transformer models , introduced by Vaswani et al. in Attention is All You Need, revolutionized NLP by using a self-attention mechanism for parallel processing, improving efficiency. Models like BERT , GPT , and T5 set new benchmarks in machine translation and text generation. Layers in Neural Network Architecture Input Layer: This is where the network receives its input data. Each input neuron in the layer corresponds to a feature in the input data. Hidden Layers: These layers perform most of the computational heavy lifting. A neural network can have one or multiple hidden layers. Each layer consists of units neurons that transform the inputs into something that the output layer can use. Output Layer: The final layer produces the output of the

data. Hidden Layers: These layers perform most of the computational heavy lifting. A neural network can have one or multiple hidden layers. Each layer consists of units neurons that transform the inputs into something that the output layer can use. Output Layer: The final layer produces the output of the model. The format of these outputs varies depending on the specific task e.g., classification, regression. Working of Neural Networks Forward Propagation When data is input into the network, it passes through the network in the forward direction, from the input layer through the hidden layers to the output layer. This process is known as forward propagation. Heres what happens during this phase: Linear Transformation: Each neuron in a layer receives inputs, which are multiplied by the weights associated with the connections. These products are summed together, and a bias is added to the sum. This can be represented mathematically as: Texz w_1x_1 w_2x_2 ldots w_nx_n bTex where TexwTex represents the weights, TexxTex represents the inputs, and TexbTex is the bias. Activation: The result of the linear transformation denoted as TexzTex is then passed through an activation function. The activation function is crucial because it introduces non-linearity into the system, enabling the network to learn more complex patterns. Popular activation functions include ReLU, sigmoid, and tanh. Backpropagation After forward propagation, the network evaluates its performance using a loss function, which measures the difference between the actual output and the predicted output. The goal of training is to minimize this loss. This is where backpropagation comes into play: Loss Calculation: The network calculates the loss, which provides a measure of error in the predictions. The loss function could vary; common choices are mean squared error for regression tasks or cross-entropy loss for classification. Gradient Calculation: The network computes the gradients of the loss function with respect to each weight and bias in the network. This involves applying the chain rule of calculus to find out how much each part of the output error can be attributed to each weight and bias. Weight Update: Once the gradients are calculated, the weights and biases are updated using an optimization algorithm like stochastic gradient descent SGD. The weights are adjusted in the opposite direction of the gradient to minimize the loss. The size of the step taken in each update is determined by the learning rate. Iteration This process of forward propagation, loss calculation, backpropagation,

are updated using an optimization algorithm like stochastic gradient descent SGD. The weights are adjusted in the opposite direction of the gradient to minimize the loss. The size of the step taken in each update is determined by the learning rate. Iteration This process of forward propagation, loss calculation, backpropagation, and weight update is repeated for many iterations over the dataset. Over time, this iterative process reduces the loss, and the networks predictions become more accurate. Through these steps, neural networks can adapt their parameters to better approximate the relationships in the data, thereby improving their performance on tasks such as classification, regression, or any other predictive modeling. Example of Email Classification Lets consider a record of an email dataset: Email ID Email Content Sender Subject Line Label 1 Get free gift cards now! spamexample.com Exclusive Offer 1 To classify this email, we will create a feature vector based on the analysis of keywords such as free, win, and offer. The feature vector of the record can be presented as: free: Present 1 win: Absent 0 offer: Present 1 Email ID Email Content Sender Subject Line Feature Vector Label 1 Get free gift cards now! spamexample.com Exclusive Offer 1, 0, 1 1 How Neurons Process Data in a Neural Network In a neural network , input data is passed through multiple layers, including one or more hidden layers . Each neuron in these hidden layers performs several operations, transforming the input into a usable output. 1. Input Layer: The input layer contains 3 nodes that indicates the presence of each keyword. 2. Hidden Layer The input data is passed through one or more hidden layers. Each neuron in the hidden layer performs the following operations Weighted Sum : Each input is multiplied by a corresponding weight assigned to the connection. For example, if the weights from the input layer to the hidden layer neurons are as follows: Weights for Neuron H1: 0.5, -0.2, 0.3 Weights for Neuron H2: 0.4, 0.1, -0.5 Calculate Weighted Input : For Neuron H1: TextextCalculation1 times 0.5 0 times -0.2 1 times 0.3 0.5 0 0.3 0.8Tex For Neuron H2: TextextCalculation 10.400.110.50.400.50.1Tex Activation Function : The result is passed through an activation function e.g., ReLU or sigmoid to introduce non-linearity. For H1, applying ReLU: TextextReLU0.8 0.8Tex For H2, applying ReLU: TextextReLU-0.1 0Tex 3. Output Layer The activated outputs from the hidden layer are passed to the

0.8Tex For Neuron H2: TextextCalculation 10.400.110.50.400.50.1Tex Activation Function : The result is passed through an activation function e.g., ReLU or sigmoid to introduce non-linearity. For H1, applying ReLU: TextextReLU0.8 0.8Tex For H2, applying ReLU: TextextReLU-0.1 0Tex 3. Output Layer The activated outputs from the hidden layer are passed to the output neuron. The output neuron receives the values from the hidden layer neurons and computes the final prediction using weights: Suppose the output weights from hidden layer to output neuron are 0.7, 0.2 . Calculation: TextextInput0.8 times 0.7 0 times 0.2 0.56 0 0.56Tex Final Activation : The output is passed through a sigmoid activation function to obtain a probability: Texsigma0.56 approx 0.636Tex 4. Final Classification The output value of approximately 0.636 indicates the probability of the email being spam. Since this value is greater than 0.5, the neural network classifies the email as spam 1. Neural Network for Email Classification Example Learning of a Neural Network 1. Learning with Supervised Learning In supervised learning, a neural network learns from labeled input-output pairs provided by a teacher. The network generates outputs based on inputs, and by comparing these outputs to the known desired outputs, an error signal is created. The network iteratively adjusts its parameters to minimize errors until it reaches an acceptable performance level. 2. Learning with Unsupervised Learning Unsupervised learning involves data without labeled output variables. The primary goal is to understand the underlying structure of the input data X. Unlike supervised learning, there is no instructor to guide the process. Instead, the focus is on modeling data patterns and relationships, with techniques like clustering and association commonly used. 3. Learning with Reinforcement Learning Reinforcement learning enables a neural network to learn through interaction with its environment. The network receives feedback in the form of rewards or penalties, guiding it to find an optimal policy or strategy that maximizes cumulative rewards over time. This approach is widely used in applications like gaming and decision-making. Types of Neural Networks There are seven types of neural networks that can be used. Feedforward Networks : A feedforward neural network is a simple artificial neural network architecture in which data moves from input to output in a single direction. Singlelayer Perceptron: A single-layer perceptron consists of only one layer of neurons . It takes inputs, applies weights, sums them up, and uses an activation function to produce an output . Multilayer Perceptron

simple artificial neural network architecture in which data moves from input to output in a single direction. Singlelayer Perceptron: A single-layer perceptron consists of only one layer of neurons . It takes inputs, applies weights, sums them up, and uses an activation function to produce an output . Multilayer Perceptron MLP : MLP is a type of feedforward neural network with three or more layers, including an input layer, one or more hidden layers, and an output layer. It uses nonlinear activation functions. Convolutional Neural Network CNN : A Convolutional Neural Network CNN is a specialized artificial neural network designed for image processing. It employs convolutional layers to automatically learn hierarchical features from input images, enabling effective image recognition and classification. Recurrent Neural Network RNN : An artificial neural network type intended for sequential data processing is called a Recurrent Neural Network RNN. It is appropriate for applications where contextual dependencies are critical, such as time series prediction and natural language processing, since it makes use of feedback loops, which enable information to survive within the network. Long Short-Term Memory LSTM : LSTM is a type of RNN that is designed to overcome the vanishing gradient problem in training RNNs. It uses memory cells and gates to selectively read, write, and erase information. Implementation of Neural Network using TensorFlow Here, we implement simple feedforward neural network that trains on a sample dataset and makes predictions using following steps: Step 1: Import Necessary Libraries Import necessary libraries, primarily TensorFlow and Keras, along with other required packages such as NumPy and Pandas for data handling. Python import numpy as np import pandas as pd from tensorflow.keras.models import Sequential from tensorflow.keras.layers import Dense Step 2: Create and Load Dataset Create or load a dataset. Convert the data into a format suitable for training usually NumPy arrays. Define features X and labels y. Python data 'feature1' : 0.1 , 0.2 , 0.3 , 0.4 , 0.5 , 'feature2' : 0.5 , 0.4 , 0.3 , 0.2 , 0.1 , 'label' : 0 , 0 , 1 , 1 , 1 df pd . DataFrame data X df 'feature1' , 'feature2' . values y df 'label' . values Step 3: Create a Neural Network Instantiate a Sequential model and add layers. The input layer and hidden layers are typically created using Dense layers, specifying the number of neurons and activation functions. Python model Sequential model

data X df 'feature1' , 'feature2' . values y df 'label' . values Step 3: Create a Neural Network Instantiate a Sequential model and add layers. The input layer and hidden layers are typically created using Dense layers, specifying the number of neurons and activation functions. Python model Sequential model . add Dense 8 , input_dim 2 , activation 'relu' Hidden layer model . add Dense 1 , activation 'sigmoid' Output layer Step 4: Compiling the Model Compile the model by specifying the loss function, optimizer, and metrics to evaluate during training. Python model . compile loss 'binary_crossentropy' , optimizer 'adam' , metrics 'accuracy' Step 5: Train the Model Fit the model on the training data, specifying the number of epochs and batch size. This step trains the neural network to learn from the input data. Python model . fit X , y , epochs 100 , batch_size 1 , verbose 1 Step 5: Make Predictions Use the trained model to make predictions on new data. Process the output to interpret the predictions e.g., convert probabilities to binary outcomes. Python test_data np . array 0.2 , 0.4 prediction model . predict test_data predicted_label prediction 0.5 . astype int Complete Code for the Implementation Lets have a complete code for the implementation. Python import numpy as np import pandas as pd from tensorflow.keras.models import Sequential from tensorflow.keras.layers import Dense data 'feature1' : 0.1 , 0.2 , 0.3 , 0.4 , 0.5 , 'feature2' : 0.5 , 0.4 , 0.3 , 0.2 , 0.1 , 'label' : 0 , 0 , 1 , 1 , 1 df pd . DataFrame data X df 'feature1' , 'feature2' . values y df 'label' . values model Sequential model . add Dense 8 , input_dim 2 , activation 'relu' model . add Dense 1 , activation 'sigmoid' model . compile loss 'binary_crossentropy' , optimizer 'adam' , metrics 'accuracy' model . fit X , y , epochs 100 , batch_size 1 , verbose 1 test_data np . array 0.2 , 0.4 prediction model . predict test_data predicted_label prediction 0.5 . astype int print f "Predicted label: predicted_label 0 0 " Output: Predicted label: 1 Advantages of Neural Networks Neural networks are widely used in many different applications because of their many benefits: Adaptability: Neural networks are useful for activities where the link between inputs and outputs is complex or not well defined because they can adapt

predicted_label 0 0 " Output: Predicted label: 1 Advantages of Neural Networks Neural networks are widely used in many different applications because of their many benefits: Adaptability: Neural networks are useful for activities where the link between inputs and outputs is complex or not well defined because they can adapt to new situations and learn from data. Pattern Recognition: Their proficiency in pattern recognition renders them efficacious in tasks like as audio and image identification, natural language processing, and other intricate data patterns. Parallel Processing: Because neural networks are capable of parallel processing by nature, they can process numerous jobs at once, which speeds up and improves the efficiency of computations. Non-Linearity: Neural networks are able to model and comprehend complicated relationships in data by virtue of the non-linear activation functions found in neurons, which overcome the drawbacks of linear models. Disadvantages of Neural Networks Neural networks, while powerful, are not without drawbacks and difficulties: Computational Intensity: Large neural network training can be a laborious and computationally demanding process that demands a lot of computing power. Black box Nature: As black box models, neural networks pose a problem in important applications since it is difficult to understand how they make decisions. Overfitting: Overfitting is a phenomenon in which neural networks commit training material to memory rather than identifying patterns in the data. Although regularization approaches help to alleviate this, the problem still exists. Need for Large datasets: For efficient training, neural networks frequently need sizable, labeled datasets; otherwise, their performance may suffer from incomplete or skewed data. Applications of Neural Networks Neural networks have numerous applications across various fields: Image and Video Recognition : CNNs are extensively used in applications such as facial recognition, autonomous driving, and medical image analysis. Natural Language Processing NLP : RNNs and transformers power language translation, chatbots, and sentiment analysis. Finance : Predicting stock prices, fraud detection, and risk management. Healthcare : Neural networks assist in diagnosing diseases, analyzing medical images, and personalizing treatment plans. Gaming and Autonomous Systems : Neural networks enable real-time decision-making, enhancing user experience in video games and enabling autonomous systems like self-driving cars. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article What is Dynamic Neural Network? V Veena Ghorakavi Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Articles Computer Subject Machine Learning Technical Scripter Technical Scripter 2018 2 More Practice Tags : Machine Learning

ML Stochastic Gradient Descent SGD Last Updated : 03 Mar, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Stochastic Gradient Descent SGD is an optimization algorithm in machine learning, particularly when dealing with large datasets. It is a variant of the traditional gradient descent algorithm but offers several advantages in terms of efficiency and scalability, making it the go-to method for many deep-learning tasks. To understand SGD, its essential to first comprehend the concept of gradient descent . What is Gradient Descent? Gradient descent is an iterative optimization algorithm used to minimize a loss function, which represents how far the models predictions are from the actual values. The main goal is to adjust the parameters of a model weights, biases, etc. so that the error is minimized. The update rule for the traditional gradient descent algorithm is: Textheta theta eta nabla_theta JthetaTex In traditional gradient descent, the gradients are computed based on the entire dataset, which can be computationally expensive for large datasets. Need for Stochastic Gradient Descent For large datasets, computing the gradient using all data points can be slow and memory-intensive. This is where SGD comes into play. Instead of using the full dataset to compute the gradient at each step, SGD uses only one random data point or a small batch of data points at each iteration. This makes the computation much faster. Path followed by batch gradient descent vs. path followed by SGD: Optimization path followed by Gradient Descent Optimization path followed SGD Optimization Working of Stochastic Gradient Descent In Stochastic Gradient Descent, the gradient is calculated for each training example or a small subset of training examples rather than the entire dataset. The update rule becomes: Textheta theta eta nabla_theta Jtheta; x_i, y_iTex Where: Texx_iTex and Texy_iTex represent the features and target of the i-th training example. The gradient Texnabla_theta Jtheta; x_i, y_iTex is now calculated for a single data point or a small batch. The key difference from traditional gradient descent is that, in SGD, the parameter updates are made based on a single data point, not the entire dataset. The random selection of data points introduces stochasticity, which can be both an advantage and a challenge. Implementing Stochastic Gradient Descent from Scratch Step 1: Data Generation In this step, we generate synthetic data for the linear regression problem. The data consists of feature X and the target y, where the relationship is

of data points introduces stochasticity, which can be both an advantage and a challenge. Implementing Stochastic Gradient Descent from Scratch Step 1: Data Generation In this step, we generate synthetic data for the linear regression problem. The data consists of feature X and the target y, where the relationship is linear, i.e., y 4 3 X noise. X is a random array of 100 samples between 0 and 2. y is the target, calculated using a linear equation with a little random noise to make it more realistic. Python import numpy as np Generate synthetic data np . random . seed 42 X 2 np . random . rand 100 , 1 y 4 3 X np . random . randn 100 , 1 For a linear regression with one feature, the model is described by the equation: Texy theta_0 theta_1 cdot XTex Where: Textheta_0Tex is the intercept the bias term, Textheta_1Tex is the slope or coefficient associated with the input feature TexXTex . Step 2: Define the SGD Function Here we define the core function for Stochastic Gradient Descent SGD. The function takes the input data X and y. It initializes the model parameters, performs stochastic updates for a specified number of epochs, and records the cost at each step. theta is the parameter vector intercept and slope initialized randomly. X_bias is the augmented X with a column of ones added for the bias term intercept. In each epoch, the data is shuffled, and for each mini-batch or single sample, the gradient is calculated, and the parameters are updated. The cost is calculated as the mean squared error, and the history of the cost is recorded to monitor convergence. Python def sgd X , y , learning_rate 0.1 , epochs 1000 , batch_size 1 : m len X theta np . random . randn 2 , 1 Add a bias term to X X_0 1 X_bias np . c_ np . ones m , 1 , X cost_history for epoch in range epochs : Shuffle the data at the beginning of each epoch indices np . random . permutation m X_shuffled X_bias indices y_shuffled y indices for i in range 0 , m , batch_size : Select a mini-batch or a single sample X_batch X_shuffled i : i batch_size y_batch y_shuffled i : i batch_size Compute the gradient gradients 2 batch_size X_batch . T . dot X_batch . dot

m X_shuffled X_bias indices y_shuffled y indices for i in range 0 , m , batch_size : Select a mini-batch or a single sample X_batch X_shuffled i : i batch_size y_batch y_shuffled i : i batch_size Compute the gradient gradients 2 batch_size X_batch . T . dot X_batch . dot theta - y_batch Update the parameters theta theta - learning_rate gradients Calculate and record the cost Mean Squared Error predictions X_bias . dot theta cost np . mean predictions - y 2 cost_history . append cost Print progress every 100 epochs if epoch 100 0 : print f "Epoch epoch , Cost: cost " return theta , cost_history Step 3: Train the Model Using SGD In this step, we call the sgd function to train the model. We specify the learning rate, number of epochs, and batch size for SGD. Python Train the model using SGD theta_final , cost_history sgd X , y , learning_rate 0.1 , epochs 1000 , batch_size 1 Output: Step 4: Visualize the Cost Function After training, we visualize how the cost function evolves over epochs. This helps us understand if the algorithm is converging properly. Python import matplotlib.pyplot as plt Plot the cost history plt . plot cost_history plt . xlabel 'Epochs' plt . ylabel 'Cost MSE' plt . title 'Cost Function during Training' plt . show Output: Step 5: Plot the Data and Regression Line In this step, we visualize the data points and the fitted regression line after training. We plot the data points as blue dots and the predicted line from the final theta as a red line. Python Plot the data and the regression line plt . scatter X , y , color 'blue' , label 'Data points' plt . plot X , np . c_ np . ones X . shape 0 , 1 , X . dot theta_final , color 'red' , label 'SGD fit line' plt . xlabel 'X' plt . ylabel 'y' plt . title 'Linear Regression using Stochastic Gradient Descent' plt . legend plt . show Output: Step 6: Print the Final Model Parameters After training, we print the final parameters of the model, which include the slope and intercept. These values are the result of optimizing the model using SGD. Python print f "Final parameters: theta_final " Output: Final parameters: 4.35097872 3.45754277 The final parameters returned by the model are: Textheta_0 4.3, quad theta_1 3.4Tex

we print the final parameters of the model, which include the slope and intercept. These values are the result of optimizing the model using SGD. Python print f "Final parameters: theta_final " Output: Final parameters: 4.35097872 3.45754277 The final parameters returned by the model are: Textheta_0 4.3, quad theta_1 3.4Tex Then the fitted linear regression model will be: Texy 4.3 3.4 cdot XTex This means: When X0, y4.3the intercept or bias term. For each unit increase in TexX, yTex will increase by 3.4 units the slope or coefficient. Advantages of Stochastic Gradient Descent Efficiency : Because it uses only one or a few data points to calculate the gradient, SGD can be much faster, especially for large datasets. Each step requires fewer computations, leading to quicker convergence. Memory Efficiency : Since it does not require storing the entire dataset in memory for each iteration, SGD can handle much larger datasets than traditional gradient descent. Escaping Local Minima : The noisy updates in SGD, caused by the stochastic nature of the algorithm, can help the model escape local minima or saddle points, potentially leading to better solutions in non-convex optimization problems common in deep learning. Online Learning : SGD is well-suited for online learning, where the model is trained incrementally as new data comes in, rather than on a static dataset. Challenges of Stochastic Gradient Descent Noisy Convergence : Since the gradient is estimated based on a single data point or a small batch, the updates can be noisy, causing the cost function to fluctuate rather than steadily decrease. This makes convergence slower and more erratic than in batch gradient descent. Learning Rate Tuning : SGD is highly sensitive to the choice of learning rate. A learning rate that is too large may cause the algorithm to diverge, while one that is too small can slow down convergence. Adaptive methods like Adam and RMSprop address this by adjusting the learning rate dynamically during training. Long Training Times : While each individual update is fast, the convergence might take a longer time overall since the steps are more erratic compared to batch gradient descent. Variants of Stochastic Gradient Descent While traditional SGD is a powerful method, there are several improvements and variants designed to improve convergence and stability: Mini-batch SGD : Instead of using a single data point, mini-batch SGD uses a small batch of data points to calculate the gradient. This

gradient descent. Variants of Stochastic Gradient Descent While traditional SGD is a powerful method, there are several improvements and variants designed to improve convergence and stability: Mini-batch SGD : Instead of using a single data point, mini-batch SGD uses a small batch of data points to calculate the gradient. This strikes a balance between the efficiency of SGD and the stability of batch gradient descent. It reduces the noise in the updates while maintaining the computational efficiency. Momentum : Momentum helps accelerate SGD by adding a fraction of the previous update to the current one. This allows the algorithm to keep moving in the same direction and can help overcome oscillations in the cost function. Adaptive Methods e.g., Adam, RMSprop : These methods dynamically adjust the learning rate for each parameter. Adam, for example, uses both the average of the gradients first moment and the average of the squared gradients second moment to compute an adaptive learning rate, improving convergence and stability. Applications of Stochastic Gradient Descent SGD and its variants are widely used across various domains of machine learning: Deep Learning : In training deep neural networks, SGD is the default optimizer due to its efficiency with large datasets and its ability to work with large models. Deep learning frameworks like TensorFlow and PyTorch typically use variants like Adam or RMSprop, which are based on SGD. Natural Language Processing NLP : Models like Word2Vec and transformers are trained using SGD variants to optimize large models on vast text corpora. Computer Vision : For tasks such as image classification, object detection, and segmentation, SGD has been fundamental in training convolutional neural networks CNNs. Reinforcement Learning : SGD is also used to optimize the parameters of models used in reinforcement learning, such as deep Q-networks DQNs and policy gradient methods. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Major Kernel Functions in Support Vector Machine SVM R Rahul_Roy Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Computer Subject Deep Learning Machine Learning Python-Quizzes AI-ML-DS With Python python 3 More Practice Tags : Machine Learning python

Weights and Bias in Neural Networks Last Updated : 04 Oct, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Machine learning, with its ever-expanding applications in various domains, has revolutionized the way we approach complex problems and make data-driven decisions. At the heart of this transformative technology lies neural networks, computational models inspired by the human brain's architecture. Neural networks have the remarkable ability to learn from data and uncover intricate patterns, making them invaluable tools in fields as diverse as image recognition, natural language processing, and autonomous vehicles. To grasp the inner workings of neural networks, we must delve into two essential components: weights and biases. Table of Content Weights and Biases in Neural Networks: Unraveling the Core of Machine Learning I. The Foundation of Neural Networks: Weights II. Biases: Introducing Flexibility and Adaptability III. The Learning Process: Forward and Backward Propagation IV. Real-World Applications: From Image Recognition to Natural Language Processing V. Weights and Biases FAQs: Addressing Common Questions VI. Conclusion: The Power of Weights and Biases in Machine Learning Weights and Biases in Neural Networks: Unraveling the Core of Machine Learning In this comprehensive exploration, we will demystify the roles of weights and biases within neural networks , shedding light on how these parameters enable machines to process information, adapt, and make predictions. We will delve into the significance of weights as the strength of connections between neurons, and biases as essential offsets that introduce flexibility into the learning process. As we unravel the mechanics of these components, we will also uncover the iterative learning process of neural networks, involving both forward and backward propagation. To put this into context, we will provide practical examples that illustrate the real-world applications and implications of weights and biases in machine learning. I. The Foundation of Neural Networks: Weights Imagine a neural network as a complex web of interconnected nodes, each representing a computational unit known as a neuron. These neurons work together to process information and produce output. However, not all connections between neurons are created equal. This is where weights come into play. Weights are numerical values associated with the connections between neurons. They determine the strength of these connections and, in turn, the influence that one neuron's output has on another neuron's input. Think of weights as the coefficients that adjust the impact of incoming data. They can increase or decrease the importance of specific information.

associated with the connections between neurons. They determine the strength of these connections and, in turn, the influence that one neuron's output has on another neuron's input. Think of weights as the coefficients that adjust the impact of incoming data. They can increase or decrease the importance of specific information. During the training phase of a neural network, these weights are adjusted iteratively to minimize the difference between the network's predictions and the actual outcomes. This process is akin to fine-tuning the network's ability to make accurate predictions. Let's consider a practical example to illustrate the role of weights. Suppose you're building a neural network to recognize handwritten digits. Each pixel in an image of a digit can be considered an input to the network. The weights associated with each pixel determine how much importance the network places on that pixel when making a decision about which digit is represented in the image. As the network learns from a dataset of labeled digits, it adjusts these weights to give more significance to pixels that are highly correlated with the correct digit and less significance to pixels that are less relevant. Over time, the network learns to recognize patterns in the data and make accurate predictions. In essence, weights are the neural network's way of learning from data. They capture the relationships between input features and the target output, allowing the network to generalize and make predictions on new, unseen data. II. Biases: Introducing Flexibility and Adaptability While weights determine the strength of connections between neurons , biases provide a critical additional layer of flexibility to neural networks. Biases are essentially constants associated with each neuron. Unlike weights, biases are not connected to specific inputs but are added to the neuron's output. Biases serve as a form of offset or threshold, allowing neurons to activate even when the weighted sum of their inputs is not sufficient on its own. They introduce a level of adaptability that ensures the network can learn and make predictions effectively. To understand the role of biases, consider a simple example. Imagine a neuron that processes the brightness of an image pixel. Without a bias, this neuron might only activate when the pixel's brightness is exactly at a certain threshold. However, by introducing a bias, you allow the neuron to activate even when the brightness is slightly below or above the threshold. This flexibility is crucial because

brightness of an image pixel. Without a bias, this neuron might only activate when the pixel's brightness is exactly at a certain threshold. However, by introducing a bias, you allow the neuron to activate even when the brightness is slightly below or above the threshold. This flexibility is crucial because real-world data is rarely perfectly aligned with specific thresholds. Biases enable neurons to activate in response to various input conditions, making neural networks more robust and capable of handling complex patterns. During training, biases are also adjusted to optimize the network's performance. They can be thought of as fine-tuning parameters that help the network fit the data better. III. The Learning Process: Forward and Backward Propagation Now that we understand the roles of weights and biases, let's explore how they come into play during the learning process of a neural network. A. Forward Propagation Forward propagation is the initial phase of processing input data through the neural network to produce an output or prediction. Here's how it works: Input Layer: The input data is fed into the neural network's input layer. Weighted Sum: Each neuron in the subsequent layers calculates a weighted sum of the inputs it receives, where the weights are the adjustable parameters. Adding Biases: To this weighted sum, the bias associated with each neuron is added. This introduces an offset or threshold for activation. Activation Function: The result of the weighted sum plus bias is passed through an activation function. This function determines whether the neuron should activate or remain dormant based on the calculated value. Propagation: The output of one layer becomes the input for the next layer, and the process repeats until the final layer produces the network's prediction. B. Backward Propagation Once the network has made a prediction, it's essential to evaluate how accurate that prediction is and make adjustments to improve future predictions. This is where backward propagation comes into play: Error Calculation: The prediction made by the network is compared to the actual target or ground truth. The resulting error, often quantified as a loss or cost, measures the disparity between prediction and reality. Gradient Descent: Backward propagation involves minimizing this error. To do so, the network calculates the gradient of the error with respect to the weights and biases. This gradient points in the direction of the steepest decrease in error. Weight and Bias Updates: The network uses this gradient information

and reality. Gradient Descent: Backward propagation involves minimizing this error. To do so, the network calculates the gradient of the error with respect to the weights and biases. This gradient points in the direction of the steepest decrease in error. Weight and Bias Updates: The network uses this gradient information to update the weights and biases throughout the network. The goal is to find the values that minimize the error. Iterative Process: This process of forward and backward propagation is repeated iteratively on batches of training data. With each iteration, the network's weights and biases get closer to values that minimize the error. In essence, backward propagation fine-tunes the network's parameters, adjusting weights and biases to make the network's predictions more accurate. This iterative learning process continues until the network achieves a satisfactory level of performance on the training data. IV. Real-World Applications: From Image Recognition to Natural Language Processing To fully appreciate the significance of weights and biases, let's explore some real-world applications where neural networks shine and where the roles of these parameters become evident. A. Image Recognition One of the most prominent applications of neural networks is image recognition. Neural networks have demonstrated remarkable abilities in identifying objects, faces, and even handwriting in images. Consider a neural network tasked with recognizing cats in photographs. The input to the network consists of pixel values representing the image. Each pixel's importance is determined by the weights associated with it. If certain pixels contain features highly indicative of a cat such as whiskers, ears, or a tail, the corresponding weights are adjusted to give these pixels more influence over the network's decision. Additionally, biases play a crucial role in this context. They allow neurons to activate even if the combination of weighted pixel values falls slightly below the threshold required to recognize a cat. Biases introduce the flexibility needed to account for variations in cat images, such as differences in lighting, pose, or background. Through the training process, the network fine-tunes its weights and biases, learning to recognize cats based on the patterns it discovers in the training dataset. Once trained, the network can accurately classify new, unseen images as either containing a cat or not. B. Natural Language Processing In the realm of natural language processing, neural networks have transformed our ability to understand and generate human language. Applications range from sentiment analysis and language translation to chatbots and

trained, the network can accurately classify new, unseen images as either containing a cat or not. B. Natural Language Processing In the realm of natural language processing, neural networks have transformed our ability to understand and generate human language. Applications range from sentiment analysis and language translation to chatbots and voice assistants. Consider the task of sentiment analysis, where a neural network determines the sentiment positive, negative, or neutral of a given text. The input to the network is a sequence of words, each represented as a numerical vector. The importance of each word in influencing the sentiment prediction is determined by the weights associated with these word vectors. Weights play a critical role in capturing the nuances of language. For instance, in a sentence like "I absolutely loved the movie," the word "loved" should carry more weight in predicting a positive sentiment than the word "absolutely." During training, the network learns these weightings by analyzing a dataset of labeled text examples. Biases, on the other hand, allow the network to adapt to different writing styles and contexts. They ensure that the network can activate even if the weighted sum of word vectors falls slightly below the threshold for a particular sentiment category. Through iterative learning, the network refines its weights and biases to become proficient at sentiment analysis. It can then analyze and classify the sentiment of new, unseen text data, enabling applications like automated review analysis and customer feedback processing. C. Autonomous Vehicles Autonomous vehicles represent an exciting frontier where neural networks, along with their weights and biases, are making a significant impact. These vehicles rely on neural networks for tasks such as object detection, path planning, and decision-making. Consider the task of detecting pedestrians in the vicinity of an autonomous vehicle. The vehicle's sensors, such as cameras and lidar, capture a continuous stream of data. Neural networks process this data, with weights determining the importance of various features in identifying pedestrians. For example, the network might assign higher weights to features like the shape of a person's body or their movement patterns. Biases in this context allow the network to adapt to different lighting conditions, weather, and variations in pedestrian appearance. They ensure that the network can detect pedestrians even in challenging situations. Through extensive training on diverse datasets, neural networks in autonomous vehicles learn to make accurate decisions about when to brake, accelerate, or steer to

the network to adapt to different lighting conditions, weather, and variations in pedestrian appearance. They ensure that the network can detect pedestrians even in challenging situations. Through extensive training on diverse datasets, neural networks in autonomous vehicles learn to make accurate decisions about when to brake, accelerate, or steer to ensure safety. Weights and biases play a crucial role in this decision-making process, enabling the vehicle to navigate complex and dynamic environments. VI. Conclusion: The Power of Weights and Biases in Machine Learning In the ever-evolving landscape of machine learning, neural networks have emerged as powerful tools for solving complex problems and making sense of vast datasets. At the core of these networks lie two fundamental components: weights and biases. These parameters enable neural networks to adapt, learn, and generalize from data, opening the door to a wide range of applications across domains as diverse as computer vision, natural language processing, and autonomous vehicles. Weights serve as the levers that control the strength of connections between neurons, allowing the network to prioritize relevant information in the data. Biases introduce flexibility and adaptability, ensuring that neurons can activate in various contexts and conditions. Together, these parameters make neural networks robust learners capable of uncovering intricate patterns in data. The learning process of neural networks, involving forward and backward propagation, is a testament to the power of iterative refinement. Through this process, networks adjust their weights and biases to minimize errors and make accurate predictions. It is in this iterative journey that neural networks transform from novices to experts, capable of handling real-world challenges. As we look to the future of machine learning and artificial intelligence, understanding the roles and significance of weights and biases in neural networks will remain essential. These components not only drive the success of current applications but also pave the way for innovative solutions to complex problems that were once deemed insurmountable. In conclusion, weights and biases are the unsung heroes of the machine learning revolution, quietly shaping the future of technology and enabling machines to understand, adapt, and make informed decisions in an increasingly data-driven world. For more information refer : Weight Initialization Techniques for Deep Neural Networks Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article What is a Neural Network? A aimanasif2799 Follow Improve Article Tags : Geeks Premier League Deep Learning AI-ML-DS Neural Network Geeks Premier League 2023 1 More

Future of AI and Data Science Last Updated : 04 Jun, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report In companies, invention and technology are more important than efficiency and productivity. But to increase the adoption of AI and Data Science programs, companies can maintain a healthy balance between the two. Data Science and AI applications have created standardized processes to make business processes run faster and more efficiently. Also, they are deeply rooted in companies' decision-making processes, customer loyalty, product development, market research, and communication strategies. Future of AI and Data Science This article explores the current state, future trends, ethical considerations, industry-specific innovations, business transformation, and career opportunities in AI and Data Science. How is AI and Data Science changing the Future? Recent Advancements and Milestones AI and Data Science have made significant strides in recent years. From machine learning algorithms that predict consumer behaviour to deep learning models that can diagnose diseases, the impact is widespread. Natural Language Processing NLP has improved dramatically, enabling more sophisticated conversational agents and language translation services. Key Applications in Various Industries AI and Data Science applications span multiple sectors: Healthcare : Predictive analytics for patient care and personalized medicine. Finance : Fraud detection, algorithmic trading, and risk management. Retail : Customer behaviour analytics and inventory management. Transportation : Autonomous vehicles and traffic management systems. Present Challenges and Limitations Despite the progress, challenges remain. These include data privacy concerns, the need for large datasets to train models, and the difficulty in interpreting complex models often referred to as the " black box " problem. There is also a skills gap, with demand for data science and AI expertise outstripping supply. Future Trends in Data Science Integration with AI and Machine Learning: As AI and machine learning technologies evolve, their integration with Data Science will deepen, enabling more advanced analytical and predictive capabilities. This integration will automate complex processes and enhance the scalability of predictive models. Advances in Deep Learning: Deep learning , particularly in areas like image and audio recognition, NLP, and anomaly detection, will continue to revolutionize Data Science. These advancements will improve pattern recognition and decision-making processes. Quantum Computing: Quantum computing promises significant advancements in processing power, which could revolutionize data analysis and problem-solving in Data Science. It will enable the processing of large datasets much faster than current technologies. Edge Computing: With the proliferation of IoT devices, edge

advancements will improve pattern recognition and decision-making processes. Quantum Computing: Quantum computing promises significant advancements in processing power, which could revolutionize data analysis and problem-solving in Data Science. It will enable the processing of large datasets much faster than current technologies. Edge Computing: With the proliferation of IoT devices, edge computing will become increasingly important. Processing data locally on devices or servers will reduce the need for data transfer to central servers, resulting in faster insights and response times for real-time applications. AI Ethics and Responsible Use: Ethical considerations around AI and Data Science , including privacy, security, fairness, and transparency, will become more prominent. Organizations must adhere to ethical guidelines to prevent harm and discrimination. Data Literacy Across Organizations: As data becomes integral to business processes, improving data literacy at all organizational levels will be crucial. This will empower more employees to make data-driven decisions. Automated and Augmented Analytics: Automation in Data Science will grow, making it more accessible to non-experts. Technologies like AutoML will enable automated data analysis and insights generation, enhancing productivity and decision-making. Focus on Data Governance and Quality: Ensuring high-quality, accurate, and reliable data will be essential as businesses increasingly rely on data-driven decision-making. Effective data governance and quality control measures will be critical. Future Trends in Artificial Intelligence AI Integration in Daily Life: AI will become deeply integrated into daily life, impacting smart homes, healthcare, and personal devices. Virtual assistants, predictive algorithms, and AI-powered services will streamline everyday tasks. Enhanced Personalization: AI will transform personalization, tailoring services and products to individual preferences. From content recommendations to personalized marketing, AI algorithms will create highly customized user experiences. Smart Automation for Industries: Industries will adopt intelligent automation enabled by AI to streamline processes, increase efficiency, reduce costs, and drive significant changes in practices. Deep Learning and Neural Networks: Deep learning and neural networks will continue to enhance AI capabilities, enabling advanced data processing, improved image recognition, language understanding, and decision-making. Evolution of Natural Language Processing NLP: NLP advancements will revolutionize human-computer interaction, making AI applications more natural and user-friendly, such as chatbots and language translation. Ethical Considerations and Regulatory Frameworks Ensuring Fairness and Accountability: Addressing discrimination and fairness is critical for ethical AI applications. Developing fair algorithms, transparent decision-making processes, and accountable mechanisms will mitigate potential social and ethical impacts. Privacy and Security Concerns: As AI and Data Science advance, ensuring privacy and security will be

Considerations and Regulatory Frameworks Ensuring Fairness and Accountability: Addressing discrimination and fairness is critical for ethical AI applications. Developing fair algorithms, transparent decision-making processes, and accountable mechanisms will mitigate potential social and ethical impacts. Privacy and Security Concerns: As AI and Data Science advance, ensuring privacy and security will be paramount. Organizations must develop robust strategies to protect sensitive data. Development of Ethical Guidelines: Creating and adhering to ethical guidelines will be crucial for responsible AI and Data Science practices. These guidelines should promote transparency, fairness, and accountability. Legal and Regulatory Issues: Governments and organizations are working to establish standards and regulations to govern AI use, balancing innovation with ethical considerations. Industry-Specific Innovations Healthcare Personalized Medicine : AI and Data Science enable personalized treatment plans based on individual patient data. Predictive Analytics : Improving patient care by predicting potential health issues before they become critical. Finance Fraud Detection : AI models can detect fraudulent activities with high accuracy. Algorithmic Trading : Enhancing trading strategies and decision-making. Retail Customer Behavior Analytics : Understanding consumer preferences and behaviours to enhance shopping experiences. Inventory Management : Optimizing stock levels and reducing waste. Transportation Autonomous Vehicles : AI is driving advancements in self-driving technology. Traffic Management Systems : Improving traffic flow and reducing congestion. Business Transformation with AI and Data Science Enhancing Decision-Making Processes: AI and Data Science enable data-driven decision-making, providing insights that enhance strategic planning and operational efficiency. Improving Operational Efficiency: Intelligent automation and predictive analytics streamline processes, reduce costs and improve overall efficiency. Enabling New Business Models: AI and Data Science facilitate the creation of innovative business models, opening new revenue streams and opportunities. Case Studies of Successful Implementations: Highlighting real-world examples of companies successfully implementing AI and Data Science to drive business transformation. Career Development in AI and Data Science Educational Background and Qualifications Pursuing degrees or certifications in Data Science, AI, machine learning , or related fields. Skill Development Developing skills in data analysis , machine learning, programming, database management, and communication. Practical Experience and Internships Gaining real-world experience through internships and projects to apply theoretical knowledge. Career Opportunities in Data Science Data Analyst Data Engineer Business Intelligence Analyst Marketing Analyst Career Opportunities in AI AI Data Analyst Machine Learning Engineer Research Scientist AI Engineer Predictions and Speculations of AI and DataScience Short-Term Predictions Next 5 Years Continued integration of AI in daily life. Advances in AI ethics and

in Data Science Data Analyst Data Engineer Business Intelligence Analyst Marketing Analyst Career Opportunities in AI AI Data Analyst Machine Learning Engineer Research Scientist AI Engineer Predictions and Speculations of AI and DataScience Short-Term Predictions Next 5 Years Continued integration of AI in daily life. Advances in AI ethics and regulatory frameworks. Medium-Term Predictions Next 10 Years Significant improvements in quantum computing and its impact on AI and Data Science. Greater adoption of AI-powered automation across industries. Long-Term Predictions Beyond 10 Years AI achieves human-like cognitive abilities. Revolutionary changes in various sectors driven by AI and Data Science. Conclusion AI and Data Science hold transformative potential, offering numerous advancements and applications that will reshape industries and daily life. Staying informed about trends and developing relevant skills will be crucial for navigating the future successfully. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article What is the impact of AI on the future of data science? Anonymous Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Blogs AI-ML-DS Data Science Blogs

Deep Learning Tutorial Last Updated : 16 Dec, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Deep Learning tutorial covers the basics and more advanced topics, making it perfect for beginners and those with experience. Whether youre just starting or looking to expand your knowledge, this guide makes it easy to learn about the different technologies of Deep Learning. Deep Learning is a branch of Artificial Intelligence AI that enables machines to learn from large amounts of data. It uses neural networks with many layers to automatically find patterns and make predictions. It is very useful for tasks like image recognition, language translation, and speech processing. Deep learning models learn directly from data, without the need for manual feature extraction. Popular applications of Deep Learning include self-driving cars, chatbots, medical image analysis, and recommendation systems. Introduction to Neural Networks Neural Networks are fundamentals of deep learning inspired by human brain. It consists of layers of interconnected nodes, or neurons, each designed to perform specific calculations. These nodes receive input data, process it through various mathematical functions, and pass the output to subsequent layers. Biological Neurons vs Artificial Neurons Single Layer Perceptron Multi-Layer Perceptron Artificial Neural Networks ANNs Basic Components of Neural Networks The basic components of neural network are: Neurons Layers in Neural Networks Weights and Biases Forward Propagation Activation Functions Loss Functions Backpropagation Learning Rate Optimization Algorithm in Deep Learning Optimization algorithms in deep learning are used to minimize the loss function by adjusting the weights and biases of the model. The most common ones are: Gradient Descent Stochastic Gradient Descent SGD Mini-batch Gradient Descent RMSprop Root Mean Square Propagation Adam Adaptive Moment Estimation Convolutional Neural Networks CNNs Convolutional Neural Networks CNNs are a class of deep neural networks that are designed for processing grid-like data, such as images. They use convolutional layers to automatically detect patterns like edges, textures, and shapes in the data. Basics of Digital Image Processing Need for CNN Strides Padding Convolutional Layers Pooling Layers Fully Connected Layers Batch Normalization Backpropagation in CNNs To learn about the implementation, you can explore the following articles: CNN based Image Classification using PyTorch CNN based Images Classification using TensorFlow CNN Based Architectures There are various architectures in CNNs that have been developed for specific kinds of problems, such as: LeNet-5 AlexNet VGG-16 Network VGG-19 Network GoogLeNetInception ResNet Residual Network MobileNet Recurrent Neural Networks RNNs Recurrent Neural Networks

CNN based Image Classification using PyTorch CNN based Images Classification using TensorFlow CNN Based Architectures There are various architectures in CNNs that have been developed for specific kinds of problems, such as: LeNet-5 AlexNet VGG-16 Network VGG-19 Network GoogLeNetInception ResNet Residual Network MobileNet Recurrent Neural Networks RNNs Recurrent Neural Networks RNNs are a class of neural networks that are used for modeling sequence data such as time series or natural language. Vanishing Gradient and Exploding Gradient Problem How RNN Differs from Feedforward Neural Networks Backpropagation Through Time BPTT Types of Recurrent Neural Networks Bidirectional RNNs Long Short-Term Memory LSTM Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory Bi-LSTM Gated Recurrent Units GRU Generative Models in Deep Learning Generative models generate new data that resembles the training data. The key types of generative models include: Generative Adversarial Networks GANs Autoencoders Restricted Boltzmann Machines RBMs Variants of Generative Adversarial Networks GANs GANs consists of two neural networks the generators and the discriminator that compete with each other in a game like framework. The variants of GANs include the following: Deep Convolutional GAN DCGAN Conditional GAN cGAN Cycle-Consistent GAN CycleGAN Super-Resolution GAN SRGAN Wasserstein GAN WGAN StyleGAN Types of Autoencoders Autoencoders are neural networks used for unsupervised learning that learns to compress and reconstruct data. There are different types of autoencoders that serve different purpose such as noise reduction, generative modelling and feature learning. Sparse Autoencoder Denoising Autoencoder Undercomplete Autoencoder Contractive Autoencoder Convolutional Autoencoder Variational Autoencoder Deep Reinforcement Learning DRL Deep Reinforcement Learning combines the representation learning power of deep learning with the decision-making ability of reinforcement learning. It enables agents to learn optimal behaviors in complex environments through trial and error, using high-dimensional sensory inputs. Reinforcement Learning Markov Decision Processes Function Approximation Key Algorithms in Deep Reinforcement Learning Deep Q-Networks DQN REINFORCE Actor-Critic Methods Proximal Policy Optimization PPO Application of Deep Learning Image Recognition: Identifying objects, faces, and scenes in photos and videos. Natural Language Processing NLP: Powering language translation, chatbots, and sentiment analysis. Speech Recognition: Converting spoken language into text for virtual assistants like Siri and Alexa. Medical Diagnostics: Detecting diseases from X-rays, MRIs, and other medical scans. Recommendation Systems: Personalizing suggestions for movies, music, and shopping. Autonomous Vehicles: Enabling self-driving cars to recognize objects and make driving decisions. Fraud Detection: Identifying unusual patterns in financial transactions and preventing fraud. Gaming: Enhancing AI in games and creating realistic environments in virtual reality. Predictive Analytics: Forecasting

VGG-16 CNN model Last Updated : 21 Mar, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report A Convolutional Neural Network CNN architecture is a deep learning model designed for processing structured grid-like data, such as images. It consists of multiple layers, including convolutional, pooling, and fully connected layers. CNNs are highly effective for tasks like image classification, object detection, and image segmentation due to their hierarchical feature extraction capabilities. VGG-16 The VGG-16 model is a convolutional neural network CNN architecture that was proposed by the Visual Geometry Group VGG at the University of Oxford. It is characterized by its depth, consisting of 16 layers, including 13 convolutional layers and 3 fully connected layers. VGG-16 is renowned for its simplicity and effectiveness, as well as its ability to achieve strong performance on various computer vision tasks, including image classification and object recognition. The models architecture features a stack of convolutional layers followed by max-pooling layers, with progressively increasing depth. This design enables the model to learn intricate hierarchical representations of visual features, leading to robust and accurate predictions. Despite its simplicity compared to more recent architectures, VGG-16 remains a popular choice for many deep learning applications due to its versatility and excellent performance. The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge ILSVRC is an annual competition in computer vision where teams tackle tasks including object localization and image classification. VGG16, proposed by Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman in 2014, achieved top ranks in both tasks, detecting objects from 200 classes and classifying images into 1000 categories. VGG-16 architecture This model achieves 92.7 top-5 test accuracy on the ImageNet dataset which contains 14 million images belonging to 1000 classes. VGG-16 Model Objective: The ImageNet dataset contains images of fixed size of 224224 and have RGB channels. So, we have a tensor of 224, 224, 3 as our input. This model process the input image and outputs the a vector of 1000 values: Texhaty beginbmatrix haty_0 haty_1 haty_2 . . . haty_999 endbmatrix Tex This vector represents the classification probability for the corresponding class. Suppose we have a model that predicts that the image belongs to class 0 with probability 1 , class 1 with probability 0.05 , class 2 with probability 0.05 , class 3 with probability 0.03 , class 780 with probability 0.72 , class 999 with probability 0.05 and all other class with 0 . so, the classification vector for

image belongs to class 0 with probability 1 , class 1 with probability 0.05 , class 2 with probability 0.05 , class 3 with probability 0.03 , class 780 with probability 0.72 , class 999 with probability 0.05 and all other class with 0 . so, the classification vector for this will be: Texhatybeginbmatrix haty_00.1 0.05 0.05 0.03 . . . haty_780 0.72 . . haty_999 0.05 endbmatrix Tex To make sure these probabilities add to 1 , we use softmax function. This softmax function is defined as follows: Texhaty_i fracez_isum_j1n ez_jTex After this we take the 5 most probable candidates into the vector. TexC beginbmatrix 780 0 1 2 999 endbmatrixTex and our ground truth vector is defined as follows: TexG beginbmatrix G_0 G_1 G_2 endbmatrixbeginbmatrix 780 2 999 endbmatrix Tex Then we define our Error function as follows: TexE frac1nsum_kmin_idc_i, G_k Tex It calculates the minimum distance between each ground truth class and the predicted candidates, where the distance function d is defined as: d0 if Texc_iG_kTex d1 otherwise So, the loss function for this example is : Texbeginaligned E frac13left min_idc_i, G_1 min_idc_i, G_2min_idc_i, G_3 right frac130 0 0 0 endalignedTex Since, all the categories in ground truth are in the Predicted top-5 matrix, so the loss becomes 0. VGG Architecture: The VGG-16 architecture is a deep convolutional neural network CNN designed for image classification tasks. It was introduced by the Visual Geometry Group at the University of Oxford. VGG-16 is characterized by its simplicity and uniform architecture, making it easy to understand and implement. The VGG-16 configuration typically consists of 16 layers, including 13 convolutional layers and 3 fully connected layers. These layers are organized into blocks, with each block containing multiple convolutional layers followed by a max-pooling layer for downsampling. VGG-16 architecture Map Heres a breakdown of the VGG-16 architecture based on the provided details: Input Layer: Input dimensions: 224, 224, 3 Convolutional Layers 64 filters, 33 filters, same padding: Two consecutive convolutional layers with 64 filters each and a filter size of 33. Same padding is applied to maintain spatial dimensions. Max Pooling Layer 22, stride 2: Max-pooling layer with a pool size of 22 and a stride of 2. Convolutional Layers 128 filters, 33 filters, same padding: Two consecutive convolutional layers with 128 filters each and a filter size of 33. Max Pooling Layer 22, stride 2: Max-pooling layer with a pool size

22, stride 2: Max-pooling layer with a pool size of 22 and a stride of 2. Convolutional Layers 128 filters, 33 filters, same padding: Two consecutive convolutional layers with 128 filters each and a filter size of 33. Max Pooling Layer 22, stride 2: Max-pooling layer with a pool size of 22 and a stride of 2. Convolutional Layers 256 filters, 33 filters, same padding: Two consecutive convolutional layers with 256 filters each and a filter size of 33. Convolutional Layers 512 filters, 33 filters, same padding: Two sets of three consecutive convolutional layers with 512 filters each and a filter size of 33. Max Pooling Layer 22, stride 2: Max-pooling layer with a pool size of 22 and a stride of 2. Stack of Convolutional Layers and Max Pooling: Two additional convolutional layers after the previous stack. Filter size: 33. Flattening: Flatten the output feature map 7x7x512 into a vector of size 25088. Fully Connected Layers: Three fully connected layers with ReLU activation. First layer with input size 25088 and output size 4096. Second layer with input size 4096 and output size 4096. Third layer with input size 4096 and output size 1000, corresponding to the 1000 classes in the ILSVRC challenge. Softmax activation is applied to the output of the third fully connected layer for classification. This architecture follows the specifications provided, including the use of ReLU activation function and the final fully connected layer outputting probabilities for 1000 classes using softmax activation. VGG-16 Configuration: The main difference between VGG-16 configurations C and D lies in the use of filter sizes in some of the convolutional layers. While both versions predominantly use 33 filters, in version D, there are instances where 11 filters are used instead. This slight variation results in a difference in the number of parameters, with version D having a slightly higher number of parameters compared to version C. However, both versions maintain the overall architecture and principles of the VGG-16 model. Different VGG Configuration Object Localization In Image: To perform localization, we need to replace the class score by bounding box location coordinates. A bounding box location is represented by the 4-D vector center coordinatesx,y, height, width. There are two versions of localization architecture, one is bounding box is shared among different candidates the output is 4 parameter vector and the other is a bounding box is class-specific the output is 4000 parameter vector.

bounding box location is represented by the 4-D vector center coordinatesx,y, height, width. There are two versions of localization architecture, one is bounding box is shared among different candidates the output is 4 parameter vector and the other is a bounding box is class-specific the output is 4000 parameter vector. The paper experimented with both approaches on VGG -16 D architecture. Here we also need to change loss from classification loss to regression loss functions such as MSE that penalize the deviation of predicted loss from the ground truth. Results: VGG-16 was one of the best performing architectures in the ILSVRC challenge 2014.It was the runner up in the classification task with a top-5 classification error of 7.32 only behind GoogLeNet with a classification error of 6.66 . It was also the winner of localization task with 25.32 localization error. Limitations Of VGG 16: It is very slow to train the original VGG model was trained on Nvidia Titan GPU for 2-3 weeks. The size of VGG-16 trained imageNet weights is 528 MB. So, it takes quite a lot of disk space and bandwidth which makes it inefficient. 138 million parameters lead to exploding gradients problem. Further advancements: Resnets are introduced to prevent exploding gradients problem that occurred in VGG-16. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Autoencoders in Machine Learning P pawangfg Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Computer Vision AI-ML-DS With Python Artificial Intelligence Neural Network 1 More

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Data Science Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos Python Data Science Data Science 10:50 58.5K Views 21012025 ... Support Vector Regression Intuition Python , Data Science , linear-regression 06:35 390 Views 17012025 ... Prompt Engineering for Summarization Data Science , Data Science 08:19 710 Views 17012025 ... PandasAI Library from OpenAI Data Science , Data Science 09:58 1.4K Views 15012025 ... Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network Data Science , Data Science 10:57 2.1K Views 06122024 ... How to Blur an Image using OpenCV? Data Science , Data Science 11:24 5.2K Views 06122024 ... How to Display an Image using OpenCV Data Science , Data Science 11:04 570 Views 06122024 ... Master Boosting in Machine Learning ML , Data Science , Machine Learning , Data Science 27:55 850 Views 06122024 ... Master Bagging in Machine Learning ML , Data Science , Machine Learning , Data Science 13:25 12.2K Views 06122024 ... Transformers in Machine Learning Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence 10:33 1.0K Views 06122024 ... Types of Neural Networks Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence 09:20 1.9K Views 06122024 ... What is Neural Networks Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence 06:19 7.6K Views 06122024 ... Introduction of Generative AI Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence Showing:

Networks Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence 09:20 1.9K Views 06122024 ... What is Neural Networks Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence 06:19 7.6K Views 06122024 ... Introduction of Generative AI Data Science , Data Science , artificial-intelligence , Artificial Intelligence Showing: 1 of 17 1 2 3 4 5 17 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Train a Deep Learning Model With Pytorch Last Updated : 10 Mar, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Neural Network is a type of machine learning model inspired by the structure and function of human brain. It consists of layers of interconnected nodes called neurons which process and transmit information. Neural networks are particularly well-suited for tasks such as image and speech recognition, natural language processing and making predictions based on large amounts of data. Below is an image of a simple neural network: Neural Network In this article we will train a neural network on the MNIST dataset. It is a dataset of handwritten digits consisting of 60,000 training examples and 10,000 test examples. Each example is a 2828 grayscale image of a handwritten digit with values ranging from 0 white to 255 black. The label for each example is the digit that the image represents with values ranging from 0 to 9. It is a dataset commonly used for training and evaluating image classification models particularly in the field of computer vision. An sample data from Mnist Installing PyTorch To install PyTorch you will need to have Python and pip the package manager for Python installed on your computer. You can install PyTorch and necessary libraries by running the following command in your command prompt or terminal: pip install torch pip install torchvision pip install torchsummary Implementing Deep Neural Network The model will be a simple feedforward neural network and well walk through the steps to implement it. Step 1: Import the necessary Libraries We will be importing Pytorch and matplotlib. torch : The main PyTorch package for tensor operations. torchvision : A package for vision-related datasets and models. Python import torch import torch.nn as nn import torch.optim as optim import torchvision import torchvision.transforms as transforms import matplotlib.pyplot as plt Step 2: Load the MNIST Datasets First, we need to import the necessary libraries and load the datase which can be easily loaded using the torchvision library. Python transform transforms . Compose transforms . ToTensor , transforms . Normalize 0.5 ,, 0.5 , trainset torchvision . datasets . MNIST root '.data' , train True , download True , transform transform testset torchvision . datasets . MNIST root '.data' , train False , download True , transform transform trainloader torch . utils . data . DataLoader trainset , batch_size 64 , shuffle True testloader torch .

. datasets . MNIST root '.data' , train True , download True , transform transform testset torchvision . datasets . MNIST root '.data' , train False , download True , transform transform trainloader torch . utils . data . DataLoader trainset , batch_size 64 , shuffle True testloader torch . utils . data . DataLoader testset , batch_size 64 , shuffle False transforms.Compose : A sequence of transformations to apply to the images. ToTensor : Converts images into PyTorch tensors. Normalize : Normalizes the pixel values to the range -1, 1. DataLoader : DataLoader is a utility class that handles the batching, shuffling and loading of data for training and evaluation. batch_size64 means that in each iteration 64 samples will be processed at once. Step 3: Build the model Lets define a simple feedforward neural network with one hidden layer. This model will take 2828 images, flatten them and pass them through a fully connected layer followed by an output layer with 10 units for the 10 digits. Python class SimpleNN nn . Module : def __init__ self : super SimpleNN , self . __init__ self . fc1 nn . Linear 28 28 , 128 self . fc2 nn . Linear 128 , 10 def forward self , x : x x . view - 1 , 28 28 x torch . relu self . fc1 x x self . fc2 x return x model SimpleNN nn.Module : The base class for all neural network modules in PyTorch. By inheriting from this class we create a custom model with layers and a forward pass. nn.Linear : This is a basic layer where each input is connected to every output node. fc1 : The first fully connected layer transforms the 2828 image flattened to a 784-length vector into a 128-dimensional vector. fc2 : The second fully connected layer outputs a 10-dimensional vector corresponding to the 10 possible digit classes. ReLU : We use ReLU activation after the first layer to introduce non-linearity. Step 4: Define the Loss Function and Optimizer For classification tasks we use CrossEntropyLoss as the loss function which is appropriate for multi-class classification. The Adam optimizer will be used to update the weights during training. Python criterion nn . CrossEntropyLoss optimizer optim . Adam model . parameters , lr 0.001 CrossEntropyLoss : Measures the difference between the predicted and true labels. Adam : A popular optimization algorithm that

is appropriate for multi-class classification. The Adam optimizer will be used to update the weights during training. Python criterion nn . CrossEntropyLoss optimizer optim . Adam model . parameters , lr 0.001 CrossEntropyLoss : Measures the difference between the predicted and true labels. Adam : A popular optimization algorithm that adapts the learning rate during training. lr0.001 sets the learning rate which determines how much we adjust the weights during each update. Step 5: Train the Model Now we will train the model. In each epoch we will: Perform a forward pass to compute predictions. Calculate the loss. Perform backpropagation to compute gradients. Update the model weights using the optimizer. Python train_losses num_epochs 5 for epoch in range num_epochs : running_loss 0.0 for i , images , labels in enumerate trainloader , 0 : if torch . cuda . is_available : images , labels images . cuda , labels . cuda model . cuda else : model . cpu optimizer . zero_grad outputs model images loss criterion outputs , labels loss . backward optimizer . step running_loss loss . item if i 100 99 : print f "Epoch epoch 1 , Batch i 1 Loss: running_loss 100 : .4f " running_loss 0.0 train_losses . append running_loss len trainloader Output : Epoch 1, Batch 100 Loss: 0.8981 Epoch 1, Batch 200 Loss: 0.4278 Epoch 1, Batch 300 Loss: 0.3847 . . Epoch 5, Batch 900 Loss: 0.1005 loss.backward : Computes gradients for each model parameter. optimizer.step : Updates the models weights using the gradients. cuda : If a GPU is available we move the images, labels and model to the GPU for faster computation. optimizer.zero_grad : Before performing a backward pass we need to set all the gradients to zero. Otherwise the gradients will accumulate from previous iterations. loss.backward : This computes the gradients for the models weights indicating how much the weights need to be adjusted. optimizer.step : This updates the models weights based on the gradients calculated during the backward pass. After every 100 mini-batches the average loss for that mini-batch is printed. The total loss for each epoch is also tracked for later visualization. Step 6: Plot Training and Validation Curves Its useful to visualize how the training loss changes over time. This helps us understand if the model is learning effectively. Python plt . plot train_losses , label "Training Loss" plt . title 'Training Loss Curve' plt

is also tracked for later visualization. Step 6: Plot Training and Validation Curves Its useful to visualize how the training loss changes over time. This helps us understand if the model is learning effectively. Python plt . plot train_losses , label "Training Loss" plt . title 'Training Loss Curve' plt . xlabel 'Epochs' plt . ylabel 'Loss' plt . legend plt . show Output: Training Validation Graph The Training Loss Curve shows how the models loss decreases over epochs indicating that the model is learning and improving its performance. In the first epoch there is a sharp decline in loss suggesting quick learning followed by a more gradual decrease indicating the model is stabilizing and nearing optimal performance. The loss eventually plateaus which suggests the model is converging and no longer improving rapidly a sign that training may be nearing completion without overfitting. Step 7: Evaluation Once the model is trained we evaluate its performance on the test dataset. We compute the accuracy by comparing the predicted labels with the true labels. Python correct 0 total 0 model . eval with torch . no_grad : for images , labels in testloader : if torch . cuda . is_available : images , labels images . cuda , labels . cuda outputs model images _ , predicted torch . max outputs , 1 total labels . size 0 correct predicted labels . sum . item accuracy 100 correct total print f "Test Accuracy: accuracy : .2f " Output: Test Accuracy: 96.87 We achieved a good accuracy of 96.87 which is great for a deep learning model. In the above code: model.eval : Sets the model to evaluation mode disabling dropout layers. torch.no_grad : Ensures that no gradients are calculated during evaluation saving memory. In summary deep learning with PyTorch is a powerful tool that can be used to build and train a wide range of models. The MNIST dataset is a good starting point to learn the basics but its important to keep in mind that there are many other aspects to consider when working with real-world datasets and problems. With the right knowledge and resources deep learning can be used to solve complex problems and make predictions with high accuracy. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Linear Regression using PyTorch S sumeshk333 Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Deep Learning Machine Learning AI-ML-DS With Python Python-PyTorch 1 More Practice

Meta-Learning in Machine Learning Last Updated : 29 Nov, 2023 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Traditional machine learning requires a huge dataset that is specific to a particular task and wishes to train a model for regression or classification purposes using these datasets. Thats radically far from how humans take advantage of their past experiences to learn quickly a new task from only a handset of examples. What is Meta Learning? Meta-learning is learning to learn algorithms, which aim to create AI systems that can adapt to new tasks and improve their performance over time, without the need for extensive retraining. Meta-learning algorithms typically involve training a model on a variety of different tasks, with the goal of learning generalizable knowledge that can be transferred to new tasks. This is different from traditional machine learning, where a model is typically trained on a single task and then used for that task alone. Meta-learning, also called learning to learn algorithms, is a branch of machine learning that focuses on teaching models to self-adapt and solve new problems with little to no human intervention. It entails using a different machine learning algorithm that has already been trained to act as a mentor and transfer knowledge. Through data analysis, meta-learning gains insights from this mentor algorithms output and improves the developing algorithms ability to solve problems effectively. To increase the flexibility of automatic learning, meta-learning makes use of algorithmic metadata. It comprehends how algorithms adjust to a variety of problems, improving the functionality of current algorithms and possibly even learning the algorithm itself. Meta-learning optimizes learning by using algorithmic metadata, including performance measures and data-derived patterns, to strategically learn, select, alter, or combine algorithms for specific problems. The process of learning to learn or the meta-training process can be crudely summed up in the following diagram: Meta-Learning Working of Meta Learning Training models to quickly adapt to new tasks with minimal data is the focus of a machine learning paradigm known as meta-learning, or learning to learn. In order to help models quickly adapt to new, untested tasks using a limited amount of task-specific data, meta-learning aims to enable models to generalize learning experiences across different tasks. Two primary phases are involved in the typical meta-learning workflow: Meta Learning Tasks: Exposure to a range of tasks, each with its own set of parameters or characteristics, is part of the meta-training

limited amount of task-specific data, meta-learning aims to enable models to generalize learning experiences across different tasks. Two primary phases are involved in the typical meta-learning workflow: Meta Learning Tasks: Exposure to a range of tasks, each with its own set of parameters or characteristics, is part of the meta-training phase. Model Training : Many tasks are used to train a base model, also known as a learner. The purpose of this model is to represent shared knowledge or common patterns among various tasks. Adaption : With few examples, the model is trained to quickly adjust its parameters to new tasks. Meta TestingAdaption New Task : The model is given a brand-new task during the meta-testing stage that it was not exposed to during training. Few Shots: With only a small amount of data, the model is modified for the new task few-shot learning. In order to make this adaptation, the models parameters are frequently updated using the examples from the new task. Generalization : Meta-learning efficacy is evaluated by looking at how well the model quickly generalizes to the new task. Why we need Meta-Learning Meta-Learning can enable the machine to learn more efficiently and effectively from limited data and it can adapt to any changes in the problem quickly. Here are some examples of meta-learning processes: Few-shot Learning: It is a type of learning algorithm or technique, which can learn in very few steps of training and on limited examples. Transfer Learning : It is a technique in which knowledge is transferred from one task to another if there are some similarities between both tasks. In this case, another model can be developed with very limited data and few-step training using the knowledge of another pre-trained model. Learning the meta-parameters Throughout the whole training process, backpropagation is used in meta-learning to back-propagate the meta-loss gradient, all the way back to the original model weights. It is highly computational, uses second derivatives, and is made easier by frameworks such as Tensorflow and PyTorch. By contrasting model predictions with ground truth labels, the meta-lossa measure of the meta-learners efficacyis obtained. Parameters are updated during training by meta-optimizers such as SGD, RMSProp, and Adam. Three main steps subsumed in meta-learning are as follows: Inclusion of a learning sub-model. A dynamic inductive bias: Altering the inductive bias of a learning algorithm to match the given problem. This is done by altering key

Parameters are updated during training by meta-optimizers such as SGD, RMSProp, and Adam. Three main steps subsumed in meta-learning are as follows: Inclusion of a learning sub-model. A dynamic inductive bias: Altering the inductive bias of a learning algorithm to match the given problem. This is done by altering key aspects of the learning algorithm, such as the hypothesis representation, heuristic formulae, or parameters. Many different approaches exist. Extracting useful knowledge and experience from the metadata of the model: Metadata consists of knowledge about previous learning episodes and is used to efficiently develop an effective hypothesis for a new task. This is also a form of Inductive transfer. Meta-Learning Approaches There are several approaches to Meta-Learning, some common approaches are as follows: Metric-based meta-learning: This approach basically aims to find a metric space. It is similar to the nearest neighbor algorithm which measures the similarity or distance to learn the given examples. The goal is to learn a function that converts input examples into a metric space with labels that are similar for nearby points and dissimilar for far-off points. The success of metric-based meta-learning models depends on the selection of the kernel function, which determines the weight of each labeled example in predicting the label of a new example. Applications of metric-based meta-learning include few-shot classification, where the goal is to classify new classes with very few examples. Optimization-based Meta-Learning : This approach focuses on optimizing algorithms in such a way that they can quickly solve the new task in very less examples. In the neural network to better accomplish a task Usually, multiple neural networks are used. One neural net is responsible for the optimization different techniques can be used of hyperparameters of another neural net to improve its performance. Few-shot learning in reinforcement learning is an example of an optimization-based meta-learning application where the objective is to learn a policy that can handle new issues with a small number of examples. Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning MAML : It is an optimization-based meta-learning framework that enables a model to quickly adapt to new tasks with only a few examples by learning generalizable features that can be used in different tasks. In MAML, the model is trained on a set of meta-training tasks, which are similar to the target tasks but have a different distribution of data. The model learns a set of generalizable parameters that can be quickly adapted to

learning generalizable features that can be used in different tasks. In MAML, the model is trained on a set of meta-training tasks, which are similar to the target tasks but have a different distribution of data. The model learns a set of generalizable parameters that can be quickly adapted to new tasks with only a few examples by performing a few gradient descent steps. Model-based Meta-Learning: Model-based Meta-Learning is a well-known meta-learning algorithm that learns how to initialize the model parameters correctly so that it can quickly adapt to new tasks with few examples. It updates its parameters rapidly with a few training steps and quickly adapts to new tasks by learning a set of common parameters. It could be a neural network with a certain architecture that is designed for fast updates, or it could be a more general optimization algorithm that can quickly adapt to new tasks. The parameters of a model are trained such that even a few iterations of applying gradient descent with relatively few data samples from a new task new domain can lead to good generalization on that task. Model-based meta-learning has shown impressive results in various domains, including few-shot learning, robotics, and natural language processing. Memory-Augmented Neural Networks: Memory-augmented neural networks, such as Neural Turing Machines NTMs and Differentiable Neural Computers DNCs, utilize external memory for improved meta-learning, enabling complex reasoning and tasks like machine translation and image captioning. Meta Networks: Meta Networks is a model-based meta-learning. The key idea behind Meta Networks is to use a meta-learner to generate the weights of a task-specific network, which is then used to solve a new task. The task-specific network is designed to take input from the meta-learner and produce output that is specific to the new task. In other words, the architecture of the task-specific network is learned on-the-fly by the meta-learner during the meta-training phase, which enables rapid adaptation to new tasks with only a few examples. Bayesian Meta-Learning: Bayesian Meta-Learning or Bayesian optimization is a family of meta-Learning algorithms that uses the bayesian method for optimizing a black-box function that is expensive to evaluate, by constructing a probabilistic model of the function, which is then iteratively updated as new data is acquired. Comparison of Various Meta-Learning Techniques Approach Description Application Metric-based meta-learning Learns a metric space where nearby points have similar labels. Few-shot classification. Optimization-based meta-learning Optimizes algorithms to quickly solve new

to evaluate, by constructing a probabilistic model of the function, which is then iteratively updated as new data is acquired. Comparison of Various Meta-Learning Techniques Approach Description Application Metric-based meta-learning Learns a metric space where nearby points have similar labels. Few-shot classification. Optimization-based meta-learning Optimizes algorithms to quickly solve new tasks with limited data. Few-shot learning in reinforcement learning. Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning MAML Framework for quickly adapting to new tasks with limited data. Various machine-learning tasks. Reptile Gradient-based meta-learning algorithm that updates model parameters through iterations. Few-shot learning. Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient descent L2L-GD2 Meta-learning approach that optimizes meta-optimization algorithms. Few-shot learning and transfer learning. Advantages of Meta-learning Meta-Learning offers more speed: Meta-learning approaches can produce learning architectures that perform better and faster than hand-crafted models. Better generalization: Meta-learning models can frequently generalize to new tasks more effectively by learning to learn, even when the new tasks are very different from the ones they were trained on. Scaling: Meta-learning can automate the process of choosing and fine-tuning algorithms, thereby increasing the potential to scale AI applications. Fewer data required: These approaches assist in the development of more general systems, which can transfer knowledge from one context to another. This reduces the amount of data you need in solving problems in the new context. Improved performance: Meta-learning can help improve the performance of machine learning models by allowing them to adapt to different datasets and learning environments. By leveraging prior knowledge and experience, meta-learning models can quickly adapt to new situations and make better decisions. Fewer hyperparameters: Meta-learning can help reduce the number of hyperparameters that need to be tuned manually. By learning to optimize these parameters automatically, meta-learning models can improve their performance and reduce the need for manual tuning. Meta-learning Optimization During the training process of a machine learning algorithm, hyperparameters determine which parameters should be used. These variables have a direct impact on how successfully a model trains. Optimizing hyperparameters may be done in several ways. Grid Search: The Grid Search technique makes use of manually set hyperparameters. All suitable combinations of hyperparameter values within a given range are tested during a grid search. After that, the model selects the best hyperparameter value. But because the process takes so long and is so ineffective, this approach is seen as conventional. Grid Search may be found in the Sklearn library. Random Search: The optimal solution for

a given range are tested during a grid search. After that, the model selects the best hyperparameter value. But because the process takes so long and is so ineffective, this approach is seen as conventional. Grid Search may be found in the Sklearn library. Random Search: The optimal solution for the created model is found using the random search approach, which uses random combinations of the hyperparameters. Even though it has characteristics similar to grid search, it has been shown to produce superior results overall. The disadvantage of random search is that it produces a high level of volatility while computing. Random Search may be found in the Sklearn library. Random Search is superior to Grid Search. Applications of Meta-learning Meta-learning algorithms are already in use in various applications, some of which are: Online learning tasks in reinforcement learning Sequence modeling in Natural language processing Image classification tasks in Computer vision Few-shot learning: Meta-learning can be used to train models that can quickly adapt to new tasks with limited data. This is particularly useful in scenarios where the cost of collecting large amounts of data is prohibitively high, such as in medical diagnosis or autonomous driving. Model selection : Meta-learning can help automate the process of model selection by learning to choose the best model for a given task based on past experience. This can save time and resources while also improving the accuracy and robustness of the resulting model. Hyperparameter optimization: Meta-learning can be used to automatically tune hyperparameters for machine-learning models. By learning from past experience, meta-learning models can quickly find the best hyperparameters for a given task, leading to better performance and faster training times. Transfer learning: Meta-learning can be used to facilitate transfer learning, where knowledge learned in one domain is transferred to another domain. This can be especially useful in scenarios where data is scarce or where the target domain is vastly different from the source domain. Recommender systems: Meta-learning can be used to build better recommender systems by learning to recommend the most relevant items based on past user behavior. This can improve the accuracy and relevance of recommendations, leading to better user engagement and satisfaction. Conclusion: Although Meta-Learning approaches are currently computationally expensive, they are an exciting frontier for AI Research and can be a big step forward in our quest to achieve Artificial General Intelligence, as computers would have the ability to

accuracy and relevance of recommendations, leading to better user engagement and satisfaction. Conclusion: Although Meta-Learning approaches are currently computationally expensive, they are an exciting frontier for AI Research and can be a big step forward in our quest to achieve Artificial General Intelligence, as computers would have the ability to not only make accurate classifications and estimates but would able to improve their parameters and hyperparameters to get better at multiple tasks in multiple problem contexts. Frequently Asked Questions FAQs 1. What is Meta-Learning? Learning to learn, or meta-learning, is the process of using the knowledge that has been acquired from exposure to a wide range of tasks during meta-training to train models to quickly adapt to new tasks with few data. 2. How does Meta Learning Works? In order to teach models generic features and adaptability, meta-learning entails exposing them to a variety of tasks during training. In meta-testing, models quickly adjust to novel tasks with the least amount of task-specific information. 3. What is Few Shot learning in Meta Learning? Training models to perform well on tasks with few examples is the main goal of few-shot learning, a subset of meta-learning. From a limited number of task-specific examples, models are able to generalize effectively. 4. What is Model-Agnostic Meta-LearningMAML? The goal of the well-liked meta-learning algorithm MAML is to identify model parameters that will enable easy task adaptation. The goal is to acquire initial model weights that can be quickly adjusted to a variety of tasks. 5. What are the applications of Meta Learning? Meta-learning is useful in situations like few-shot learning, transfer learning, and low task-specific example sets where models must quickly adapt to new tasks with little data. 6. How does Meta Learning enable Transfer Learning? When task-specific data is scarce or unavailable, meta-learning gives models the capacity to transfer knowledge from one task to another, enabling efficient learning. 7. Can Meta Learning improve Generalization? Yes, by subjecting the model to a variety of tasks during meta-training, meta-learning can improve the models generalization by allowing it to acquire more adaptive and generalized features. 8. How is Meta-Learning Different from Traditional Machine Learning ? By utilizing knowledge gathered from exposure to a variety of tasks, meta-learning seeks to train models that can quickly adapt to new tasks with limited data, in contrast to traditional machine learning, which trains models for specific tasks. 9. What Challenges are Associated

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? C Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos CPP C 10:14 54.1K Views 11012025 ... Program to Find the Sum of All Digits of a Number CPP , Maths , C , C Programs 10:37 15.0K Views 09012025 ... Graham Scan Algorithm CPP , Maths , C 03:53 11.4K Views 08012025 ... Primality Test Introduction and School Method CPP , prime numbers 04:41 9.1K Views 08012025 ... C Program to Find Roots of a Quadratic Equation CPP , Maths , C Programs 08:23 4.4K Views 03012025 ... C Program on Multiplication of Two Matrices CPP , Basics of CPP , matrix , CPP Programs 08:00 3.5K Views 03012025 ... JavaScript Program to Check if Two Strings are Anagrams CPP , Basics of CPP , C Programs , anagram , CPP Programs 01:59 450 Views 20122024 ... Assignment Operators in C CPP , C 03:36 2.9K Views 16082024 ... C Program to Return Maximum occurring Character in an Input String CPP , C , Basics of CPP , C Programs , String , CPP Programs 02:25 33.7K Views 13082024 ... Program to Count Digits in an Integer CPP , Maths , Basics of CPP , C Programs , CPP Programs 03:12 109.8K Views 18072024 ... C Program to Find GCD CPP , Maths , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 10:49 43.3K Views

CPP Programs 02:25 33.7K Views 13082024 ... Program to Count Digits in an Integer CPP , Maths , Basics of CPP , C Programs , CPP Programs 03:12 109.8K Views 18072024 ... C Program to Find GCD CPP , Maths , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 10:49 43.3K Views 17072024 ... C Program to Calculate Power of a Number CPP , Maths , C Programs , maths-power 04:45 55.4K Views 12072024 ... JavaScript Program to Find the Factorial of a Number CPP , C Programs , factorial Showing: 1 of 18 1 2 3 4 5 18 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Core Java Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos Core Java Core Java 25:14 4.5K Views 20092022 ... How JVM works and it's architecture Java , Core Java , Basics of Java , java-jvm 17:11 4.0K Views 01092022 ... Static Variable, Static Method Static Block in Java Java , Java , Core Java , Core Java , static-keyword Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing

Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Dsa Self Paced Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos DSA Self Paced Dsa Self Paced 13:43 22.5K Views 14082024 ... Solving the Majority Element Problem DSA Self Paced , Array , DSA 11:18 33.8K Views 14082024 ... Maximum Subarray Sum DSA Self Paced , Array , DSA 07:35 1.5K Views 25052023 ... Check if all rows of a matrix are circular rotations of each other DSA Self Paced , SDE Sheet , matrix Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems

With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? System Design Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos System Design System Design 05:28 1.2K Views 24122024 ... Single Responsibility Principle - System Design System Design , System Design 53:44 38.4K Views 24122024 ... Design a tiny URL generator - System Design System Design , System Design 50:57 2.8K Views 24122024 ... Designing Twitter System Design System Design , System Design 58:29 13.6K Views 24122024 ... How to Design a Rate Limiter API Learn System Design System Design , System Design 06:12 2.6K Views 24122024 ... Serverless Architecture in System Design System Design , System Design 13:10 5.3K Views 24122024 ... What are Microservices? System Design , System Design 08:11 3.7K Views 24122024 ... Monolithic Architecture - System Design System Design , System Design 17:52 600 Views 24122024 ... Back of the Envelope Estimation in System Design System Design , System Design 15:45 3.2K Views 24122024 ... Framework and Requirement Gathering System Design System Design , System Design 12:34 60 Views 24122024 ... Cache Eviction Policies System Design System Design , System Design 08:07 990 Views 24122024 ... Cache Invalidation in System Design System Design , System Design 15:23 420 Views 24122024 ... Issues and Types of Message Brokers in system design System Design , System Design Showing: 1 of 5 1 2 3 4 5 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor,

Design 08:07 990 Views 24122024 ... Cache Invalidation in System Design System Design , System Design 15:23 420 Views 24122024 ... Issues and Types of Message Brokers in system design System Design , System Design Showing: 1 of 5 1 2 3 4 5 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Blockchain Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos Blockchain Blockchain 41:15 110 Views 02042024 ... Building a Blockchain App with AMD Instances on Google Cloud Platform Blockchain , Google Cloud Platform 19:32 3.1K Views 26042022 ... Medical Chain Project Blockchain Miscellaneous , Blockchain Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design

Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Data Structures In C Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos Data Structures in C Data Structures In C 10:54 11.7K Views 24082021 ... Delete Last of Singly Linked List Data Structures in C , C Language , Linked List Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Spring Basics Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos Spring Basics Spring Basics 01:22:35 3.3K Views 03042024 ... Must Know Concepts of SpringBoot Introduction to Coding , Spring Basics Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Basics Of C Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos Basics of CPP Basics Of C 08:23 4.4K Views 03012025 ... C Program on Multiplication of Two Matrices CPP , Basics of CPP , matrix , CPP Programs 08:00 3.5K Views 03012025 ... JavaScript Program to Check if Two Strings are Anagrams CPP , Basics of CPP , C Programs , anagram , CPP Programs 03:36 2.9K Views 16082024 ... C Program to Return Maximum occurring Character in an Input String CPP , C , Basics of CPP , C Programs , String , CPP Programs 02:25 33.7K Views 13082024 ... Program to Count Digits in an Integer CPP , Maths , Basics of CPP , C Programs , CPP Programs 03:12 109.8K Views 18072024 ... C Program to Find GCD CPP , Maths , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 06:01 17.3K Views 12072024 ... Pangram Checking CPP , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 11:40 8.8K Views 19122022 ... C Program to Illustrate Digital Clock starting from user set time CPP , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 10:54 6.3K Views 08122022 ... C Program for GCD of more than two or array numbers CPP , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 02:56 3.4K Views 30112022 ... C Program to Find Diagonal of a Rectangle CPP , Basics of CPP

CPP , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 10:54 6.3K Views 08122022 ... C Program for GCD of more than two or array numbers CPP , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 02:56 3.4K Views 30112022 ... C Program to Find Diagonal of a Rectangle CPP , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 05:53 5.1K Views 21112022 ... Number of Hamiltonian cycle in C CPP , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 15:56 2.9K Views 17112022 ... C Program to Take Password as an Input CPP , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs 10:29 1.2K Views 16112022 ... C Program to Find Sum of Sequence CPP , Basics of CPP , CPP Programs Showing: 1 of 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? C Language Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos C Language C Language 04:49 1.1K Views 11022025 ... C Applications of Functions C Language , C 10:31 5.6K Views 16042024 ... Introduction to Pointers in C C Language , C , pointer 06:19 34.1K Views 09042024 ... Introduction to C Language Sample Video for C Course C Language , C 03:49 6.9K Views 19022024 ... 10 Best Programming Languages to Learn in 2024 Python , C Language , Java , Python , Javascript , Go Programming , C Programs 07:35 5.9K Views 18082022 ... C Program to Store Information of Students Using Structure C Language , C Language , C-Program , c-structure 05:35 26.6K Views 21072022 ... Void Pointer in C C Language , C Language , pointer 06:12 8.8K Views 14072022 ... C Program to Concatenate Two Strings C Language , C , String , C-Program 07:10 580 Views 08072022 ... Storage classes 2 C Language , C Language 06:34 44.9K Views 08072022 ... Storage classes C Language , C Language 03:57 2.5K Views 08072022 ... Struct hack C Language , C Language , c-structure 04:47 61.8K Views 08072022 ... Memory layout of C programs C Language , C Language , C-Dynamic-Memory-Allocation 05:58 10.6K Views 07072022 ... Operations on struct variables in C C Language , C Language , c-structure Showing:

03:57 2.5K Views 08072022 ... Struct hack C Language , C Language , c-structure 04:47 61.8K Views 08072022 ... Memory layout of C programs C Language , C Language , C-Dynamic-Memory-Allocation 05:58 10.6K Views 07072022 ... Operations on struct variables in C C Language , C Language , c-structure Showing: 1 of 3 1 2 3 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Cs Subjects Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos CS-subjects Cs Subjects 24:39 430 Views 08012025 ... SQL in Action GATE , sql , SQL , CS-subjects , GATE 13:19 180 Views 08012025 ... Update data from a table GATE , sql , SQL , CS-subjects , GATE 20:16 520 Views 08012025 ... Insert Data in a table GATE , sql , SQL , CS-subjects , GATE 21:56 1.5K Views 08012025 ... Introduction to Keys GATE , sql , SQL , CS-subjects , GATE 29:21 1.8K Views 08012025 ... Data Retrieval with SQL GATE , sql , SQL , CS-subjects , GATE 23:45 23.1K Views 08012025 ... Introduction to SQL GATE , sql , SQL , CS-subjects , GATE 04:35 2.0K Views 07012025 ... Shortest Job First SJF Scheduling Algorithm Operating Systems OS , CS-subjects , scheduling-algorithm , cpu-scheduling 07:25 19.4K Views 31072024 ... Boundary Fill Algorithm in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 14:16 25.6K Views 18072024 ... Flood Fill Algorithm Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 29:09 24.1K Views 24112022 ... Resource Allocation Graph in Operating System OS , CS-subjects 22:39 4.9K Views 23112022 ... Six-State Process Model in Operating System OS , CS-subjects 24:13 26.9K Views 18112022 ... Producer Consumer Problem in Operating System OS , CS-subjects Showing: 1 of 11 1 2 3 4 5 11 Corporate Communications Address: A-143,

Allocation Graph in Operating System OS , CS-subjects 22:39 4.9K Views 23112022 ... Six-State Process Model in Operating System OS , CS-subjects 24:13 26.9K Views 18112022 ... Producer Consumer Problem in Operating System OS , CS-subjects Showing: 1 of 11 1 2 3 4 5 11 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? C Language Nxur5d Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos C Language C Language Nxur5d 03:50 2.0K Views 21012025 ... Write a C Program to Reverse a Number C Language , reverse-program , C-Program 06:54 5.9K Views 13082024 ... Count the Digits in a Number C Program C Language , C-Program , c-program 08:22 6.8K Views 18012023 ... C Program to count number of lines in a file C Language , C-Program , c-files 12:30 3.0K Views 24112022 ... C Program to Segregate Even and Odd numbers C Language , C-Program 10:26 10.8K Views 22112022 ... C Program to Calculate Grade of Student C Language , C-Program 09:59 2.6K Views 18112022 ... C program to calculate the angle between hour and minute hand C Language , C-Program 05:50 2.2K Views 07112022 ... C program to print Kite pattern C Language , pattern-printing , C-Program 07:38 520 Views 03112022 ... C Program to find the Area and Perimeter of a Semicircle C Language , C-Program 09:12 1.9K Views 28102022 ... C program to find square root of a negative number C Language , C-Program 08:03 660 Views 27102022 ... C Program to turn an image by 90 degree C Language , C-Program 05:21 4.0K Views 25102022 ... C Program to Convert Kilograms to Grams vice versa C Language , C-Program 08:27 1.1K Views

find square root of a negative number C Language , C-Program 08:03 660 Views 27102022 ... C Program to turn an image by 90 degree C Language , C-Program 05:21 4.0K Views 25102022 ... C Program to Convert Kilograms to Grams vice versa C Language , C-Program 08:27 1.1K Views 21102022 ... C Program to find cube root of a negative number C Language , C-Program Showing: 1 of 13 1 2 3 4 5 13 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Gradient Descent Algorithm in Machine Learning Last Updated : 23 Jan, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Gradient descent is the backbone of the learning process for various algorithms, including linear regression, logistic regression, support vector machines, and neural networks which serves as a fundamental optimization technique to minimize the cost function of a model by iteratively adjusting the model parameters to reduce the difference between predicted and actual values, improving the models performance . Lets see its role in machine learning: Prerequisites : Understand the working and math of gradient descent. 1. Training Machine Learning Models Neural networks are trained using Gradient Descent or its variants in combination with backpropagation . Backpropagation computes the gradients of the loss function with respect to each parameter weights and biases in the network by applying the chain rule . The process involves: Forward Propagation : Computes the output for a given input by passing data through the layers. Backward Propagation : Uses the chain rule to calculate gradients of the loss with respect to each parameter weights and biases across all layers. Gradients are then used by Gradient Descent to update the parameters layer-by-layer, moving toward minimizing the loss function. Neural networks often use advanced variants of Gradient Descent. If you want to read more about variants, please refer : Gradient Descent Variants . 2. Minimizing the Cost Function The algorithm minimizes a cost function, which quantifies the error or loss of the models predictions compared to the true labels for: 1. Linear Regression Gradient descent minimizes the Mean Squared Error MSE which serves as the loss function to find the best-fit line. Gradient Descent is used to iteratively update the weights coefficients and bias by computing the gradient of the MSE with respect to these parameters. Since MSE is a convex function gradient descent guarantees convergence to the global minimum if the learning rate is appropriately chosen. For each iteration: The algorithm computes the gradient of the MSE with respect to the weights and biases. It updates the weights w and bias b using the formula: Calculating the gradient of the log-loss with respect to the weights. Updating weights and biases iteratively to maximize the likelihood of the correct classification: Texw w alpha cdot fracpartial Jw, bpartial w, quad b b alpha cdot fracpartial Jw, bpartial bTex The formula is the parameter update rule for gradient descent ,

gradient of the log-loss with respect to the weights. Updating weights and biases iteratively to maximize the likelihood of the correct classification: Texw w alpha cdot fracpartial Jw, bpartial w, quad b b alpha cdot fracpartial Jw, bpartial bTex The formula is the parameter update rule for gradient descent , which adjusts the weights w and biases b to minimize a cost function. This process iteratively adjusts the lines slope and intercept to minimize the error. 2. Logistic Regression In logistic regression, gradient descent minimizes the Log Loss Cross-Entropy Loss to optimize the decision boundary for binary classification. Since the output is probabilistic between 0 and 1, the sigmoid function is applied. The process involves: Calculating the gradient of the log-loss with respect to the weights. Updating weights and biases iteratively to maximize the likelihood of the correct classification: Texw w alpha cdot fracpartial Jwpartial wTex This adjustment shifts the decision boundary to separate classes more effectively. 3. Support Vector Machines SVMs For SVMs, gradient descent optimizes the hinge loss , which ensures a maximum-margin hyperplane. The algorithm: Calculates gradients for the hinge loss and the regularization term if used, such as L2 regularization. Updates the weights to maximize the margin between classes while minimizing misclassification penalties with same formula provided above. Gradient descent ensures the optimal placement of the hyperplane to separate classes with the largest possible margin. Gradient Descent Python Implementation Diving further into the concept, lets understand in depth, with practical implementation. Import the necessary libraries Python import torch import torch.nn as nn import matplotlib.pyplot as plt Set the input and output data Python set random seed for reproducibility torch . manual_seed 42 set number of samples num_samples 1000 create random features with 2 dimensions x torch . randn num_samples , 2 create random weights and bias for the linear regression model true_weights torch . tensor 1.3 , - 1 true_bias torch . tensor - 3.5 Target variable y x true_weights . T true_bias Plot the dataset fig , ax plt . subplots 1 , 2 , sharey True ax 0 . scatter x :, 0 , y ax 1 . scatter x :, 1 , y ax 0 . set_xlabel 'X1' ax 0 . set_ylabel 'Y' ax 1 . set_xlabel 'X2' ax 1 . set_ylabel 'Y' plt . show Output : X vs Y Lets first try with a linear model: Texy_p xWTbTex Python Define the

y ax 1 . scatter x :, 1 , y ax 0 . set_xlabel 'X1' ax 0 . set_ylabel 'Y' ax 1 . set_xlabel 'X2' ax 1 . set_ylabel 'Y' plt . show Output : X vs Y Lets first try with a linear model: Texy_p xWTbTex Python Define the model class LinearRegression nn . Module : def __init__ self , input_size , output_size : super LinearRegression , self . __init__ self . linear nn . Linear input_size , output_size def forward self , x : out self . linear x return out Define the input and output dimensions input_size x . shape 1 output_size 1 Instantiate the model model LinearRegression input_size , output_size Note: The number of weight values will be equal to the input size of the model, And the input size in deep Learning is the number of independent input features i.e we are putting inside the model In our case, input features are two so, the input size will also be two, and the corresponding weight value will also be two. We can manually set the model parameter Python create a random weight bias tensor weight torch . randn 1 , input_size bias torch . rand 1 create a nn.Parameter object from the weight bias tensor weight_param nn . Parameter weight bias_param nn . Parameter bias assign the weight bias parameter to the linear layer model . linear . weight weight_param model . linear . bias bias_param weight , bias model . parameters print 'Weight :' , weight print 'bias :' , bias Output : Weight : Parameter containing: tensor-0.3239, 0.5574, requires_gradTrue bias : Parameter containing: tensor0.5710, requires_gradTrue Prediction Python y_p model x y_p : 5 Output : tensor 0.7760, -0.8944, -0.3369, -0.3095, 1.7338, grad_fn Define the loss function TextextLoss function J frac1n sumactual-predicted2Tex Here we are calculating the Mean Squared Error by taking the square of the difference between the actual and the predicted value and then dividing it by its length i.e n the Total number of output or target values which is the mean of squared errors. Python Define the loss function def Mean_Squared_Error prediction , actual : error actual - prediction 2 return error . mean Find the total mean squared error loss Mean_Squared_Error y_p , y loss Output : tensor19.9126, grad_fn As we can see from the above right now the Mean Squared Error is 30559.4473. All the steps which are

Mean_Squared_Error prediction , actual : error actual - prediction 2 return error . mean Find the total mean squared error loss Mean_Squared_Error y_p , y loss Output : tensor19.9126, grad_fn As we can see from the above right now the Mean Squared Error is 30559.4473. All the steps which are done till now are known as forward propagation. Now our task is to find the optimal value of weight w and bias b which can fit our model well by giving very less or minimum error as possible. i.e Textextminimize; frac1n sumactual-predicted2Tex Now to update the weight and bias value and find the optimal value of weight and bias we will do backpropagation. Here the Gradient Descent comes into the role to find the optimal value weight and bias. How the Gradient Descent Algorithm Works For the sake of complexity, we can write our loss function for the single row as below TexJw, b frac1n y_p-y2Tex In the above function x and y are our input data i.e constant. To find the optimal value of weight w and bias b. we partially differentiate with respect to w and b. This is also said that we will find the gradient of loss function Jw,b with respect to w and b to find the optimal value of w and b. Gradient of Jw,b with respect to w Texbegin aligned J_w fracpartial Jw,bpartial w fracpartialpartial w leftfrac1n y_p-y2 right frac2y_p-ynfracpartialpartial wleft y_p-y right frac2y_p-ynfracpartialpartial wleft xWTb-y right frac2y_p-ynleftfracpartialxWTbpartial w-fracpartialypartial wright frac2y_p-ynleft x 0 right frac1ny_p-y2x end alignedTex i.e Texbegin aligned J_w fracpartial Jw,bpartial w Jw,b2x endalignedTex Gradient of Jw,b with respect to b Texbegin aligned J_b fracpartial Jw,bpartial b fracpartialpartial b leftfrac1n y_p-y2 right frac2y_p-ynfracpartialpartial bleft y_p-y right frac2y_p-ynfracpartialpartial bleft xWTb-y right frac2y_p-ynleftfracpartialxWTbpartial b-fracpartialypartial bright frac2y_p-ynleft 1 0 right frac1ny_p-y2 end alignedTex i.e Texbegin aligned J_b fracpartial Jw,bpartial b Jw,b2 endalignedTex Here we have considered the linear regression. So that here the parameters are weight and bias only. But in a fully connected neural network model there can be multiple layers and multiple parameters. but the concept will be the same everywhere. And the below-mentioned formula will work everywhere. TexParam Param -gamma nabla JTex Here, Texgamma Tex Learning rate J Loss function Texnabla Tex Gradient symbol denotes the derivative of loss function J Param weight and bias There can be multiple weight and bias values depending upon the complexity of the model and

the below-mentioned formula will work everywhere. TexParam Param -gamma nabla JTex Here, Texgamma Tex Learning rate J Loss function Texnabla Tex Gradient symbol denotes the derivative of loss function J Param weight and bias There can be multiple weight and bias values depending upon the complexity of the model and features in the dataset In our case: Texw w -gamma nabla Jw,,bb ; b -gamma nabla Jw,,bTex In the current problem, two input features, So, the weight will be two. Implementations of the Gradient Descent algorithm for the above model Steps: Find the gradient using loss.backward Get the parameter using model.linear.weight and model.linear.bias Update the parameter using the above-defined equation. Again assign the model parameter to our model Find the gradient using loss.backward Learning Rate learning_rate 0.001 Model Parameter w model.linear.weight b model.linear.bias Matually Update the model parameter w w - learning_rate w.grad b b - learning_rate b.grad assign the weight bias parameter to the linear layer model.linear.weight nn.Parameterw model.linear.bias nn.Parameterb Now Repeat this process till 1000 epochs Python Number of epochs num_epochs 1000 Learning Rate learning_rate 0.01 SUBPLOT WEIGHT BIAS VS lOSSES fig , ax1 , ax2 plt . subplots 1 , 2 , sharey True for epoch in range num_epochs : Forward pass y_p model x loss Mean_Squared_Error y_p , y Backproogation Find the fradient using loss . backward Learning Rate learning_rate 0.001 Model Parameter w model . linear . weight b model . linear . bias Matually Update the model parameter w w - learning_rate w . grad b b - learning_rate b . grad assign the weight bias parameter to the linear layer model . linear . weight nn . Parameter w model . linear . bias nn . Parameter b if epoch 1 100 0 : ax1 . plot w . detach . numpy , loss . item , 'r-' ax2 . plot b . detach . numpy , loss . item , 'g-' print 'Epoch , weight: , bias: Loss: :.4f ' . format epoch 1 , num_epochs , w . detach . numpy , b . detach . numpy , loss . item ax1 . set_xlabel 'weight' ax2 . set_xlabel 'bias' ax1 . set_ylabel 'Loss' ax2 . set_ylabel 'Loss' plt . show Output : Epoch 1001000, weight:-0.2618025 0.44433367, bias:-0.17722966 Loss: 14.1803 Epoch 2001000, weight:-0.21144074 0.35393423, bias:-0.7892358 Loss: 10.3030 Epoch 3001000, weight:-0.17063744 0.28172654, bias:-1.2897989 Loss: 7.7120 Epoch 4001000, weight:-0.13759881 0.22408141, bias:-1.699218 Loss: 5.9806 Epoch

ax1 . set_xlabel 'weight' ax2 . set_xlabel 'bias' ax1 . set_ylabel 'Loss' ax2 . set_ylabel 'Loss' plt . show Output : Epoch 1001000, weight:-0.2618025 0.44433367, bias:-0.17722966 Loss: 14.1803 Epoch 2001000, weight:-0.21144074 0.35393423, bias:-0.7892358 Loss: 10.3030 Epoch 3001000, weight:-0.17063744 0.28172654, bias:-1.2897989 Loss: 7.7120 Epoch 4001000, weight:-0.13759881 0.22408141, bias:-1.699218 Loss: 5.9806 Epoch 5001000, weight:-0.11086453 0.17808875, bias:-2.0340943 Loss: 4.8235 Epoch 6001000, weight:-0.08924612 0.14141548, bias:-2.3080034 Loss: 4.0502 Epoch 7001000, weight:-0.0717768 0.11219224, bias:-2.5320508 Loss: 3.5333 Epoch 8001000, weight:-0.0576706 0.08892148, bias:-2.7153134 Loss: 3.1878 Epoch 9001000, weight:-0.04628877 0.07040432, bias:-2.8652208 Loss: 2.9569 Epoch 10001000, weight:-0.0371125 0.05568104, bias:-2.9878428 Loss: 2.8026 Weight Bias vs Losses Geeksforgeeks From the above graph and data, we can observe the Losses are decreasing as per the weight and bias variations. Now we have found the optimal weight and bias values. Print the optimal weight and bias and Python w model . linear . weight b model . linear . bias print 'weightW n biasb ' . format w . abs , b . abs Output: weightW tensor0.0371, 0.0557, grad_fn biasb tensor2.9878, grad_fn Prediction Python pred x w . T b pred : 5 Output: tensor-2.9765, -3.1385, -3.0818, -3.0756, -2.8681, grad_fn Gradient Descent Learning Rate The learning rate is a critical hyperparameter in the context of gradient descent, influencing the size of steps taken during the optimization process to update the model parameters. Choosing an appropriate learning rate is crucial for efficient and effective model training. When the learning rate is too small , the optimization process progresses very slowly. The model makes tiny updates to its parameters in each iteration, leading to sluggish convergence and potentially getting stuck in local minima. On the other hand, an excessively large learning rate can cause the optimization algorithm to overshoot the optimal parameter values, leading to divergence or oscillations that hinder convergence. Achieving the right balance is essential. A small learning rate might result in vanishing gradients and slow convergence, while a large learning rate may lead to overshooting and instability. Vanishing and Exploding Gradients Vanishing and exploding gradients are common problems that can occur during the training of deep neural networks. These problems can significantly slow down the training process or even prevent the network from learning altogether. The vanishing gradient problem occurs when gradients become too small during backpropagation. The weights of the network are not considerably changed as a result, and the network is unable to discover the underlying patterns in the data. Many-layered

down the training process or even prevent the network from learning altogether. The vanishing gradient problem occurs when gradients become too small during backpropagation. The weights of the network are not considerably changed as a result, and the network is unable to discover the underlying patterns in the data. Many-layered deep neural networks are especially prone to this issue. The gradient values fall exponentially as they move backward through the layers, making it challenging to efficiently update the weights in the earlier layers. The exploding gradient problem, on the other hand, occurs when gradients become too large during backpropagation. When this happens, the weights are updated by a large amount, which can cause the network to diverge or oscillate, making it difficult to converge to a good solution. To address these problems the following technique can be used: Weights Regularzations: The initialization of weights can be adjusted to ensure that they are in an appropriate range. Using a different activation function, such as the Rectified Linear Unit ReLU, can also help to mitigate the vanishing gradient problem. Gradient clipping: It involves limiting the maximum and minimum values of the gradient during backpropagation. This can prevent the gradients from becoming too large or too small and can help to stabilize the training process. Batch normalization: It can also help to address these problems by normalizing the input to each layer, which can prevent the activation function from saturating and help to reduce the vanishing and exploding gradient problems. Different Variants of Gradient Descent There are several variants of gradient descent that differ in the way the step size or learning rate is chosen and the way the updates are made. Here are some popular variants: Batch Gradient Descent In batch gradient descent , To update the model parameter values like weight and bias, the entire training dataset is used to compute the gradient and update the parameters at each iteration. This can be slow for large datasets but may lead to a more accurate model. It is effective for convex or relatively smooth error manifolds because it moves directly toward an optimal solution by taking a large step in the direction of the negative gradient of the cost function. However, it can be slow for large datasets because it computes the gradient and updates the parameters using the entire training dataset at each iteration. This can result in longer training times

optimal solution by taking a large step in the direction of the negative gradient of the cost function. However, it can be slow for large datasets because it computes the gradient and updates the parameters using the entire training dataset at each iteration. This can result in longer training times and higher computational costs. Stochastic Gradient Descent SGD In SGD , only one training example is used to compute the gradient and update the parameters at each iteration. This can be faster than batch gradient descent but may lead to more noise in the updates. Mini-batch Gradient Descent I n Mini-batch gradient descent a small batch of training examples is used to compute the gradient and update the parameters at each iteration. This can be a good compromise between batch gradient descent and Stochastic Gradient Descent, as it can be faster than batch gradient descent and less noisy than Stochastic Gradient Descent. Momentum-based Gradient Descent In momentum-based gradient descent , Momentum is a variant of gradient descent that incorporates information from the previous weight updates to help the algorithm converge more quickly to the optimal solution. Momentum adds a term to the weight update that is proportional to the running average of the past gradients, allowing the algorithm to move more quickly in the direction of the optimal solution. The updates to the parameters are based on the current gradient and the previous updates. This can help prevent the optimization process from getting stuck in local minima and reach the global minimum faster. Nesterov Accelerated Gradient NAG Nesterov Accelerated Gradient NAG is an extension of Momentum Gradient Descent. It evaluates the gradient at a hypothetical position ahead of the current position based on the current momentum vector, instead of evaluating the gradient at the current position. This can result in faster convergence and better performance. Adagrad In Adagrad , the learning rate is adaptively adjusted for each parameter based on the historical gradient information. This allows for larger updates for infrequent parameters and smaller updates for frequent parameters. RMSprop In RMSprop the learning rate is adaptively adjusted for each parameter based on the moving average of the squared gradient. This helps the algorithm to converge faster in the presence of noisy gradients. Adam Adam stands for adaptive moment estimation, it combines the benefits of Momentum-based Gradient Descent, Adagrad, and RMSprop the learning rate is adaptively adjusted for each parameter based

based on the moving average of the squared gradient. This helps the algorithm to converge faster in the presence of noisy gradients. Adam Adam stands for adaptive moment estimation, it combines the benefits of Momentum-based Gradient Descent, Adagrad, and RMSprop the learning rate is adaptively adjusted for each parameter based on the moving average of the gradient and the squared gradient, which allows for faster convergence and better performance on non-convex optimization problems. It keeps track of two exponentially decaying averages the first-moment estimate, which is the exponentially decaying average of past gradients, and the second-moment estimate, which is the exponentially decaying average of past squared gradients. The first-moment estimate is used to calculate the momentum, and the second-moment estimate is used to scale the learning rate for each parameter. This is one of the most popular optimization algorithms for deep learning. Advantages Disadvantages of gradient descent Advantages of Gradient Descent Widely used: Gradient descent and its variants are widely used in machine learning and optimization problems because they are effective and easy to implement. Convergence : Gradient descent and its variants can converge to a global minimum or a good local minimum of the cost function, depending on the problem and the variant used. Scalability : Many variants of gradient descent can be parallelized and are scalable to large datasets and high-dimensional models. Flexibility : Different variants of gradient descent offer a range of trade-offs between accuracy and speed, and can be adjusted to optimize the performance of a specific problem. Disadvantages of gradient descent: Choice of learning rate: The choice of learning rate is crucial for the convergence of gradient descent and its variants. Choosing a learning rate that is too large can lead to oscillations or overshooting while choosing a learning rate that is too small can lead to slow convergence or getting stuck in local minima. Sensitivity to initialization: Gradient descent and its variants can be sensitive to the initialization of the models parameters, which can affect the convergence and the quality of the solution. Time-consuming: Gradient descent and its variants can be time-consuming, especially when dealing with large datasets and high-dimensional models. The convergence speed can also vary depending on the variant used and the specific problem. Local optima: Gradient descent and its variants can converge to a local minimum instead of the global minimum of the cost function, especially in non-convex problems. This can

dealing with large datasets and high-dimensional models. The convergence speed can also vary depending on the variant used and the specific problem. Local optima: Gradient descent and its variants can converge to a local minimum instead of the global minimum of the cost function, especially in non-convex problems. This can affect the quality of the solution, and techniques like random initialization and multiple restarts may be used to mitigate this issue. Conclusion In the intricate landscape of machine learning and deep learning, the journey of model optimization revolves around the foundational concept of gradient descent and its diverse variants. Through the lens of this powerful optimization algorithm, we explored the intricacies of minimizing the cost function, a pivotal task in training models. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Gradient Descent Algorithm in R C cs16011997 Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Data Science Deep Learning Machine Learning Practice Tags : Machine Learning

R Tutorial Learn R Programming Language Last Updated : 03 Dec, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report R is an interpreted programming language widely used for statistical computing, data analysis and visualization. R language is open-source with large community support. R provides structured approach to data manipulation, along with decent libraries and packages like Dplyr, Ggplot2, shiny, Janitor and more. Hello World Program in R Language Here is an example of the first Hello World program in R Programming Language. To print in R language you just need to use a Print function. R Code print "Hello World!" Output Hello World! R-Basics Introduction to R Programming Language Interesting Facts about R R vs Python How to Install R Studio on Windows and Linux? Creation and Execution of R File in R Studio Hello World in R Programming Fundamentals of R Basic Syntax Comments Operators Keywords Data Types Variables Variables Scope of Variable Dynamic Scoping Lexical Scoping Lexical Scoping vs Dynamic Scoping Input and Output Taking Input from User Printing Output of R Program Print the Argument to the Screen print Function Data Structures Introduction to Data Structures Vectors Introduction to Vectors Operations on Vectors Append Operation on Vectors Dot Product of Vectors Types of Vectors Assigning Vectors Length of Vectors length Function Creating a Vector of sequenced elements seq Function Get Min and Max element of a Vector range Function Formatting Numbers and Strings format Function Replace the Elements of a Vector replace Function Sorting of a Vector sort Function Convert elements of a Vector to Strings toString Function Extracting Substrings from a Character Vector substring Function More Functions on Vectors Lists Introduction to Lists Two Dimensional List Operations on Lists List of Vectors List of Dataframes Named List Check if the Object is a List is.list Function Convert an Object to List as.list Function Apply a Function over a List of elements lapply Function Operations on Multiple Lists simultaneously mapply Function More Functions on Lists Matrices Introduction to Matrices Create Matrix from Vectors Operations on Matrices Matrix Multiplication Algebraic Operations on a Matrix Combining Matrices Matrix Transpose Inverse of Matrix Working with Sparse Matrices Check if the Object is a Matrix is.matrix Function Convert an Object into a Matrix as.matrix Function Get or Set Dimensions of a Matrix dim Function Calculate Cumulative Sum of a Numeric Object cumsum Function Compute the Sum of Rows of a

Transpose Inverse of Matrix Working with Sparse Matrices Check if the Object is a Matrix is.matrix Function Convert an Object into a Matrix as.matrix Function Get or Set Dimensions of a Matrix dim Function Calculate Cumulative Sum of a Numeric Object cumsum Function Compute the Sum of Rows of a Matrix or Array rowSums Function More Functions on Matrices DataFrames Introduction to Data Frames Matrix vs Dataframe DataFrame Operations DataFrame Manipulation Joining of Dataframes The Factor Issue in a DataFrame Data Reshaping Creating a Data Frame from Vectors Data Wrangling Data Transformation Data Wrangling Working with Tibbles Melting and Casting Subsetting of DataFrames Handling Missing Values Convert an Object to Data Frame as.data.frame Function Get the number of columns of an Object ncol Function Get the number of rows of an Object nrow Function Get Addition of the Objects passed as Arguments sum Function Create Subsets of a Data frame subset Function More Functions on DataFrames Arrays Introduction to Arrays Multidimensional Array Array Operations Sorting of Arrays Convert values of an Object to Logical Vector as.logical Function Performing different Operations on Two Arrays outer Function Intersection of Two Objects intersect Function Get Exclusive Elements between Two Objects setdiff Function More Functions on Arrays Factors Introduction to Factors Level Ordering of Factors Convert Factor to Numeric and Numeric to Factor Check if a Factor is an Ordered Factor is.ordered Function Convert Unordered Factor to Ordered Factor as.ordered Function Checking if the Object is a Factor is.factor Function Convert a Vector into Factor as.factor Function More Functions on Factors Strings Introduction to Strings Working with Text String Manipulation Concatenate Two Strings String Matching How to find a SubString? Finding the length of string nchar method Adding elements in a vector append method Convert string from Lowercase to Uppercase toupper function Convert String from Uppercase to Lowercase tolower method Splitting Strings strsplit method Print a Formatted string sprintf Function More Functions on Strings Decision Making Decision Making if statement if-else statement Switch case Control Flow Introduction to Control Statements Loops for, while, repeat For loop while loop Repeat loop goto statement Break and Next statements Next Statement Functions Introduction to Functions Function Arguments Types of Functions Recursive Functions Conversion Functions Object Oriented Programming Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming Classes Objects Encapsulation Polymorphism Inheritance Abstraction Looping over Objects Creating, Listing, and Deleting Objects in Memory S3 class Explicit Coercion R6 Classes Getting attributes of Objects

Next statements Next Statement Functions Introduction to Functions Function Arguments Types of Functions Recursive Functions Conversion Functions Object Oriented Programming Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming Classes Objects Encapsulation Polymorphism Inheritance Abstraction Looping over Objects Creating, Listing, and Deleting Objects in Memory S3 class Explicit Coercion R6 Classes Getting attributes of Objects attributes and attr Function Get or Set names of Elements of an Object names Function Get the Minimum element of an Object min Function Get the Maximum element of an Object max Function More Functions on R Objects File Handling Introduction to File Handling Reading Files Writing to Files Read Lines from a File readLines Function Working with Binary Files Packages in R Introduction to Packages dplyr Package ggplot2 package Grid and Lattice Packages Shiny Package tidyr Package What Are the Tidyverse Packages? Data Munging Data Interfaces Data Handling Importing Data in R Script How To Import Data from a File? Exporting Data from scripts Working with CSV files Working with XML Files Working with Excel Files Working with JSON Files Reading Tabular Data from files Working with Databases Database Connectivity Manipulate Data Frames Using SQL Error Handling Introduction to Error Handling Condition Handling Debugging in R Programming Data Visualization Graph Plotting Graphical Models Data Visualization Charts and Graphs Add Titles to a Graph Adding Colors to Charts Adding Text to Plots Adding axis to a Plot Set or View the Graphics Palette Plotting of Data using Generic plots Bar Charts Line Graphs Adding Straight Lines to a Plot Addition of Lines to a Plot Histograms Pie Charts Scatter plots Create Dot Charts Boxplots in R Language Stratified Boxplot Create a Heatmap Pareto Chart Waffle Chart Quantile-Quantile Plot Creating 3D Plots Describe Parts of a Chart in Graphical Form Principal Component Analysis Social Network Analysis Statistics Introduction to Statistics Calculate the Mean, Median, and Mode Calculate the Average, Variance, and Standard Deviation Homogeneity of Variance Test Covariance and Correlation Correlation Matrix Visualize correlation matrix using correlogram Distance Matrix by GPU Descriptive Analysis Normal Distribution Binomial Distribution Compute the Negative Binomial Density Poisson Functions ANOVA Test MANOVA Test Naive Bayes Classifier K-NN Classifier Central Tendency Variability Skewness and Kurtosis Absolute and Relative Frequency Permutation Hypothesis Test AB Testing Completely Randomized Design Randomized Block Design Bartletts Test Tree Entropy Tukeys Five-number Summary Compute Summary Statistics of Subsets Hypothesis Testing Bootstrapping Time Series Analysis T-Test Approach Machine Learning with R Introduction to Machine

K-NN Classifier Central Tendency Variability Skewness and Kurtosis Absolute and Relative Frequency Permutation Hypothesis Test AB Testing Completely Randomized Design Randomized Block Design Bartletts Test Tree Entropy Tukeys Five-number Summary Compute Summary Statistics of Subsets Hypothesis Testing Bootstrapping Time Series Analysis T-Test Approach Machine Learning with R Introduction to Machine Learning Setting up Environment for Machine Learning Supervised and Unsupervised Learning Classification Regression and its Types Regression Analysis Decision Tree Random Forest Approach Root-Mean-Square Error Clustering Hierarchical Clustering DBScan Clustering Deep Learning Building a Simple Neural Network How Neural Networks are used for Regression? Multi Layered Neural Networks Survival Analysis Stem and Leaf Plots Why Use R Programming Language? R programming language is a best resource for data science, data analysis, data visualization and machine learning. R provides various statistical techniques like statistical tests, clustering and data reduction. Graph making is easy eg. pie chart, histogram, box, plot, etc. R is totally free and open-source Programming language. The community support with the R language is very large and it works on all OS. R programming comes with many packages libraries of functions to solve various problems. Applications of R Programming Language Some of the important applications of R Programming Language are listed below: R is used in wide range of industries for example academics, government, insurance, retail, energy, media, technology, and electronics. R helps in importing and cleaning data and data analysis. R is used in data science. R language provides us many libraries for data science e.g. Dplyr, Ggplot2, shiny, Lubridate, Knitr, Caret, Janitor. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article R Programming Language - Introduction abhishek1 Follow Improve Article Tags : R Language

Implement Convolutional Autoencoder in PyTorch with CUDA Last Updated : 24 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Autoencoders are a type of neural network architecture used for unsupervised learning tasks such as data compression, dimensionality reduction, and data denoising. The architecture consists of two main components: an encoder and a decoder. The encoder portion of the network compresses the input data into a lower-dimensional representation, while the decoder portion of the network reconstructs the original input data from this lower-dimensional representation. A Convolutional Autoencoder CAE is an autoencoder a type of deep learning neural network architecture that is commonly used for unsupervised learning tasks, such as image compression and denoising. It is an extension of the traditional autoencoder architecture that incorporates convolutional layers into both the encoder and decoder portions of the network. Same like the Autoencoder, the Convolutional Autoencoder architecture also consists of two main components: an encoder and a decoder. The encoder portion of the network processes the input image using convolutional layers and pooling operations to produce a lower-dimensional feature representation of the image. The decoder portion of the network takes this lower-dimensional feature representation and upsamples it back to the original input image size using deconvolutional layers. The final output of the network is a reconstructed image that is as close as possible to the original input image. The training process for a Convolutional Autoencoder is similar to that of a traditional autoencoder. The network is trained to minimize the difference between the original input image and the reconstructed output image using a loss function such as mean squared error MSE or binary cross-entropy BCE. Once trained, the encoder portion of the network can be used for feature extraction, and the decoder portion of the network can be used for image generation or reconstruction. Convolutional Autoencoders have shown impressive results in a variety of computer vision tasks, including image compression, denoising, and feature extraction. They have also been used in various applications such as image retrieval, object recognition, and anomaly detection. Implementation in Pytorch: Algorithm Load the dataset using PyTorchs ImageFolder class and define a dataloader. Define the Convolutional Autoencoder architecture by creating an Autoencoder class that contains an encoder and decoder, each with convolutional and pooling layers. Initialize the autoencoder model and move it to the GPU if available using the to method. Define the loss function and optimizer to use

and define a dataloader. Define the Convolutional Autoencoder architecture by creating an Autoencoder class that contains an encoder and decoder, each with convolutional and pooling layers. Initialize the autoencoder model and move it to the GPU if available using the to method. Define the loss function and optimizer to use during training. Typically, mean squared error MSE loss is used, and the Adam optimizer is a popular choice for deep learning tasks. Set the number of epochs to train for and begin the training loop. In each epoch, iterate through the batches of the dataloader, move the data to the GPU, and perform forward propagation to obtain the autoencoders output. Calculate the loss between the output and the input using the loss function. Perform backward propagation to calculate the gradients of the model parameters with respect to the loss. Use the optimizer to update the model parameters based on the calculated gradients. Print the loss after each epoch to monitor the training progress. Save the trained model to a file using the state_dict method. Code: Python import torch import torch.nn as nn import torch.optim as optim import torchvision.datasets as datasets import torchvision.transforms as transforms Define the autoencoder architecture class Autoencodernn.Module: def __init__ self : super Autoencoder, self .__init__ self .encoder nn.Sequential nn.Conv2d 3 , 16 , kernel_size 3 , stride 1 , padding 1 , nn.ReLU, nn.MaxPool2dkernel_size 2 , stride 2 , nn.Conv2d 16 , 8 , kernel_size 3 , stride 1 , padding 1 , nn.ReLU, nn.MaxPool2dkernel_size 2 , stride 2 self .decoder nn.Sequential nn.ConvTranspose2d 8 , 16 , kernel_size 3 , stride 2 , padding 1 , output_padding 1 , nn.ReLU, nn.ConvTranspose2d 16 , 3 , kernel_size 3 , stride 2 , padding 1 , output_padding 1 , nn.Sigmoid def forward self , x: x self .encoderx x self .decoderx return x Initialize the autoencoder model Autoencoder Define transform transform transforms.Compose transforms.Resize 64 , 64 , transforms.ToTensor, Load dataset train_dataset datasets.Flowers102root 'flowers' , split 'train' , transform transform, download True test_dataset datasets.Flowers102root 'flowers' , split 'test' , transform transform Define the dataloader train_loader torch.utils.data.DataLoaderdataset train_dataset, batch_size 128 , shuffle True test_loader torch.utils.data.DataLoaderdataset test_dataset, batch_size 128 Move the model to GPU device torch.device 'cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available else 'cpu' print device model.todevice Define the loss function and optimizer criterion nn.MSELoss optimizer optim.Adammodel.parameters, lr 0.001 Train the autoencoder num_epochs 50 for epoch in range num_epochs: for data in train_loader: img, _

shuffle True test_loader torch.utils.data.DataLoaderdataset test_dataset, batch_size 128 Move the model to GPU device torch.device 'cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available else 'cpu' print device model.todevice Define the loss function and optimizer criterion nn.MSELoss optimizer optim.Adammodel.parameters, lr 0.001 Train the autoencoder num_epochs 50 for epoch in range num_epochs: for data in train_loader: img, _ data img img.todevice optimizer.zero_grad output modelimg loss criterionoutput, img loss.backward optimizer.step if epoch 5 0 : print 'Epoch , Loss: :.4f' . format epoch 1 , num_epochs, loss.item Save the model torch.savemodel.state_dict, 'conv_autoencoder.pth' Output : cuda Epoch 150, Loss: 0.0919 Epoch 650, Loss: 0.0746 Epoch 1150, Loss: 0.0362 Epoch 1650, Loss: 0.0239 Epoch 2150, Loss: 0.0178 Epoch 2650, Loss: 0.0154 Epoch 3150, Loss: 0.0144 Epoch 3650, Loss: 0.0124 Epoch 4150, Loss: 0.0127 Epoch 4650, Loss: 0.0101 Plot the original image with decoded image Python3 with torch.no_grad: for data, _ in test_loader: data data.todevice recon modeldata break import matplotlib.pyplot as plt plt.figuredpi 250 fig, ax plt.subplots 2 , 7 , figsize 15 , 4 for i in range 7 : ax 0 , i.imshowdatai.cpu.numpy.transpose 1 , 2 , 0 ax 1 , i.imshowreconi.cpu.numpy.transpose 1 , 2 , 0 ax 0 , i.axis 'OFF' ax 1 , i.axis 'OFF' plt.show Output : Convolutional Autoencoder decoded image with original image Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Implementing an Autoencoder in PyTorch S sagarseth06 Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Machine Learning Deep-Learning python Python-PyTorch 1 More Practice Tags : Machine Learning python

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Python Eghmaz Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos Python Eghmaz Python Eghmaz 12:01 18.2K Views 15022025 ... Automated Trading using Python Python , Python 08:08 11.4K Views 07012025 ... Generators in Python Python , Python 15:01 1.3K Views 31122024 ... Abstract Classes in Python Python , Python 02:48 18.9K Views 12122024 ... Convert a list of characters into a string in Python Python , Python , Python-list , python-string 06:31 380 Views 10122024 ... Why is DSA Important ? Python , Data Structures , Data Structures in Python , DSA 09:40 1.0K Views 09122024 ... Get current timestamp using Python Python , Python 06:06 940 Views 05122024 ... Python end parameter in print Python , Python 17:31 1.6K Views 05122024 ... Python Tuples Python , Python 07:14 590 Views 05122024 ... How to convert Float to Int in Python? Python , Python 15:16 360 Views 05122024 ... Python program to interchange first and last elements in a list Python , Python 08:24 340 Views 05122024 ... Multidimensional array in Python Python , Data Structures , Data Structure and Algorithm , DSA 18:02 1.1K Views 03122024 ... ASCII Code in Python Python , Python Showing: 1 of 37 1 2 3 4 5 37 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K

, Data Structures , Data Structure and Algorithm , DSA 18:02 1.1K Views 03122024 ... ASCII Code in Python Python , Python Showing: 1 of 37 1 2 3 4 5 37 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Devops Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos DevOps Devops 03:59 410 Views 16012025 ... How to Install Python3 on AWS EC2? DevOps , Devops 05:40 960 Views 01082024 ... Kubernetes - Labels Selectors DevOps , Devops 07:29 3.8K Views 01082024 ... Architecture of Identity Access Management in Cloud Computing DevOps , Devops 08:20 1.3K Views 01082024 ... Server Consolidation in Cloud Computing DevOps , Devops 05:42 2.9K Views 01082024 ... Inter Cloud Resource Management DevOps , Devops 13:59 11.5K Views 01082024 ... Introduction to Kubernetes K8S DevOps , Devops 07:15 7.9K Views 16072024 ... Google Cloud Platform - Introduction to BigQuery DevOps , Devops 06:28 2.4K Views 03072024 ... Three-Tier Client Server Architecture in Distributed System DevOps , Devops 13:01 790 Views 03072024 ... How To Create a Docker Container from an Existing Image? DevOps , Devops 13:57 890 Views 25062024 ... Amazon S3 - Storage Classes DevOps , Devops 11:57 830 Views 25062024 ... Different Types of Blocks in Terraform DevOps , Devops 14:15 1.2K Views 24062024 ... Blob Storage Vs Data Lake in Azure DevOps , Devops Showing: 1 of 4 1 2 3 4 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise

Vs Data Lake in Azure DevOps , Devops Showing: 1 of 4 1 2 3 4 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Hello, What do you want to learn? Computer Graphics Data Structures Python Data Structures in C Maths Strings CPP C Tricks System Design GATE 2022 GeeksforGeeks School Hashing Competitive Programming Java Problem of the Day School Linked List Web Development Android Microsoft Office Machine Learning Git Miscellaneous Gblog TechTips React DSA Self Paced CS-subjects Data Structures and Algorithms Operating Systems C Language DBMS Basics of CPP Data Structures Basics Object Oriented Design Dynamic Programming Data Interpretation and Logical Reasoning Algorithms Core Java RESTful APIs Spring Basics CPP-Tricks Basics of Java Aptitude Job GATE YT Application Development Blockchain SDE Sheet Operating System Deep Learning Go Programming Placement C Programs Data Visualisation DevOps Docker Queue Hashing Matrix Trie Stack Graph Tree Magic Numbers Divide and Conquer React Native React JS Interview-Questions Advanced Java cloud-computing income tax Artificial Intelligence Programming Languages Computer Graphics Cyber Security Project Management No Category Selected Java Python JavaScript Miscellaneous Database Videos Computer Graphics Computer Graphics 07:25 19.4K Views 31072024 ... Boundary Fill Algorithm in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 14:16 25.6K Views 18072024 ... Flood Fill Algorithm Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 04:07 15.6K Views 12042024 ... Sampling and Quantization in Digital Image Processing Computer-Graphics , Computer Graphics 15:04 270 Views 05042024 ... Image Resolution and PPI in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , Computer Organization and Architecture 10:22 9.4K Views 01112022 ... Parallel Othographic Oblique Projection in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 08:00 12.4K Views 28102022 ... Area Sub Division Algorithm in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 08:03 1.3K Views 25102022 ... Shadow Mask Technique in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 09:26 14.4K Views 20102022 ... Illumination Models in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 10:14 210 Views 13102022 ... Beam Penetration Method in Random Scan Display Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 08:00 25.5K Views 27092022 ... Painter's Algorithm in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 14:27 5.5K Views 23092022 ... Weiler Atherton Polygon Clipping Algorithm in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 11:57 5.7K Views 16092022 ... Parametric Geometric Continuity of Curves in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects Showing: 1 of 4 1 2 3 4 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K,

Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects 11:57 5.7K Views 16092022 ... Parametric Geometric Continuity of Curves in Computer Graphics Computer-Graphics , CS-subjects Showing: 1 of 4 1 2 3 4 Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Function Approximation in Reinforcement Learning Last Updated : 28 May, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Function approximation is a critical concept in reinforcement learning RL, enabling algorithms to generalize from limited experience to a broader set of states and actions. This capability is essential when dealing with complex environments where the state and action spaces are vast or continuous. This article delves into the significance, methods, challenges, and recent advancements in function approximation within the context of reinforcement learning. Table of Content Significance of Function Approximation Types of Function Approximation in Reinforcement learning: 1. Linear Function Approximation: 2. Non-linear Function Approximation 3. Basis Function Methods 4. Kernel Methods Key Concepts in Function Approximation for Reinforcement Learning Applications of Function Approximation in Reinforcement Learning Benefits of Function Approximation Challenges in Function Approximation Conclusion Significance of Function Approximation In reinforcement learning , the agent's goal is to learn a policy that maximizes cumulative reward over time. This involves estimating value functions, which predict future rewards, or directly approximating the policy, which maps states to actions. In many practical problems, the state or action spaces are too large to allow for an exact representation of value functions or policies. Function approximation addresses this issue by enabling the use of parameterized functions to represent these components compactly. Here are some key points highlighting its significance: Handling Complexity : In many real-world problems, the state and action spaces are too vast to enumerate or store explicitly. Function approximation allows RL algorithms to represent value functions or policies compactly using parameterized functions. Generalization : Function approximation enables RL agents to generalize from limited experience to unseen states and actions. This is crucial for robust performance in environments where exhaustive exploration is impractical. Efficiency : By approximating value functions or policies, RL algorithms can operate efficiently even in high-dimensional spaces. This efficiency is essential for scaling RL to complex tasks such as robotic control or game playing. Types of Function Approximation in Reinforcement learning: 1. Linear Function Approximation: Linear function approximators use a linear combination of features to represent value functions or policies. If ϕ s represents the feature vector for state ? s , the value function V s can be approximated as: Vs approx thetaT phis where θ is a vector of weights. Linear approximators are simple and efficient but may lack the capacity to represent complex functions. 2. Non-linear Function

If ϕ s represents the feature vector for state ? s , the value function V s can be approximated as: Vs approx thetaT phis where θ is a vector of weights. Linear approximators are simple and efficient but may lack the capacity to represent complex functions. 2. Non-linear Function Approximation Non-linear methods, particularly those based on neural networks, have gained prominence due to their ability to capture complex patterns. Deep Q-Networks DQNs and Actor-Critic methods are prime examples. A neural network with weights θ approximates the value function or policy as: Vs approx fs;theta These methods, while powerful, require careful tuning and substantial computational resources. 3. Basis Function Methods Basis functions transform the state space into a higher-dimensional space where the function approximation becomes easier. Examples include Radial Basis Functions RBF and tile coding. 4. Kernel Methods Kernel-based methods, such as Gaussian processes, provide a non-parametric approach to function approximation, offering flexibility and robustness at the cost of computational scalability. Key Concepts in Function Approximation for Reinforcement Learning Features: These are characteristics extracted from the agent's state that represent relevant information for making decisions. Choosing informative features is crucial for accurate value estimation. Learning Algorithm: This algorithm updates the parameters of the chosen function to minimize the difference between the estimated value and the actual value experienced by the agent temporal-difference learning. Common algorithms include linear regression, gradient descent variants, or policy gradient methods depending on the function class. Function Class: This refers to the type of function used for approximation. Common choices include linear functions, neural networks, decision trees, or a combination of these. The complexity of the function class should be balanced with the available data and computational resources. Applications of Function Approximation in Reinforcement Learning Robotics Control: Imagine a robot arm learning to manipulate objects. The state space could include the positions, the object's location, orientation and sensor readings like gripper force. Playing Atari Games: The state space is vast, when we are dealing with complex environments like Atari games. Function approximation using deep neural networks becomes essential to capture the intricate relationships between the visual inputs and the optimal actions. Stock Market Trading: An RL agent learns to buy and sell stocks to maximize profit. The state space could involve various financial indicators like stock prices, moving averages, and market sentiment. Benefits of Function Approximation Generalization: Agents can make good decisions even in unseen states

inputs and the optimal actions. Stock Market Trading: An RL agent learns to buy and sell stocks to maximize profit. The state space could involve various financial indicators like stock prices, moving averages, and market sentiment. Benefits of Function Approximation Generalization: Agents can make good decisions even in unseen states based on what they have learned from similar states. Scalability: Function approximation allows agents to handle problems with large or continuous state spaces. Sample Efficiency: By learning patterns from a smaller set of experiences, agents can make better decisions with less data. Challenges in Function Approximation Bias-Variance Trade-off: Choosing the right complexity for the function approximator is crucial. Too simple a model introduces high bias, while too complex a model leads to high variance. Balancing this trade-off is essential for stable and efficient learning. Exploration vs. Exploitation: Function approximators must generalize well from limited exploration data. Ensuring sufficient exploration to prevent overfitting to the initial experiences is a major challenge. Stability and Convergence: Particularly with non-linear approximators like neural networks, ensuring stability and convergence during training is difficult. Techniques like experience replay and target networks in DQNs have been developed to mitigate these issues. Sample Efficiency: Function approximation methods need to be sample efficient, especially in environments where obtaining samples is costly or time-consuming. Methods like transfer learning and meta-learning are being explored to enhance sample efficiency. Conclusion Function approximation remains a cornerstone of modern reinforcement learning, enabling agents to operate in complex and high-dimensional spaces. Despite the challenges, continued advancements in this field hold the promise of more intelligent, efficient, and capable RL systems. As research progresses, the integration of novel approximation techniques, improved stability methods, and enhanced sample efficiency strategies will further unlock the potential of RL in diverse applications. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning in AI sujithchow9l8 Follow Improve Article Tags : Machine Learning Blogathon AI-ML-DS ML-Statistics Data Science Blogathon 2024 1 More Practice Tags : Machine Learning

Machine Learning Tutorial Last Updated : 22 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Machine learning is a branch of Artificial Intelligence that focuses on developing models and algorithms that let computers learn from data without being explicitly programmed for every task. In simple words, ML teaches the systems to think and understand like humans by learning from the data. It can be broadly categorized into four types: Types of Machine Learning Supervised Learning : Trains models on labeled data to predict or classify new, unseen data. Unsupervised Learning : Finds patterns or groups in unlabeled data, like clustering or dimensionality reduction. Semi-Supervised Learning: uses a mix of labeled and unlabeled data, making it helpful when labeling data is costly or time-consuming. Reinforcement Learning : Learns through trial and error to maximize rewards, ideal for decision-making tasks. Module 1: Machine Learning Pipeline In order to make predictions there are some steps through which data passes in order to produce a machine learning model that can make predictions. ML workflow Data Cleaning Feature Scaling Data Preprocessing in Python Module 2: Supervised Learning Supervised learning algorithms are generally categorized into two main types: Classification - where the goal is to predict discrete labels or categories Regression - where the aim is to predict continuous numerical values. Supervised Learning There are many algorithms used in supervised learning each suited to different types of problems. Some of the most commonly used supervised learning algorithms are: 1. Linear Regression This is one of the simplest ways to predict numbers using a straight line. It helps find the relationship between input and output. Introduction to Linear Regression Gradient Descent in Linear Regression Multiple Linear Regression Ridge Regression Lasso regression Elastic net Regression 2. Logistic Regression Used when the output is a "yes or no" type answer. It helps in predicting categories like passfail or spamnot spam. Understanding Logistic Regression Cost function in Logistic Regression 3. Decision Trees A model that makes decisions by asking a series of simple questions, like a flowchart. Easy to understand and use. Decision Tree in Machine Learning Types of Decision tree algorithms Decision Tree - Regression Implementation Decision tree - Classification Implementation 4. Support Vector Machines SVM A bit more advancedit tries to draw the best line or boundary to separate different categories of data. Understanding SVMs SVM Hyperparameter Tuning - GridSearchCV Non-Linear SVM 5. k-Nearest Neighbors k-NN

of Decision tree algorithms Decision Tree - Regression Implementation Decision tree - Classification Implementation 4. Support Vector Machines SVM A bit more advancedit tries to draw the best line or boundary to separate different categories of data. Understanding SVMs SVM Hyperparameter Tuning - GridSearchCV Non-Linear SVM 5. k-Nearest Neighbors k-NN This model looks at the closest data points neighbors to make predictions. Super simple and based on similarity. Introduction to KNN Decision Boundaries in K-Nearest Neighbors KNN 6. Naïve Bayes A quick and smart way to classify things based on probability. It works well for text and spam detection. Introduction to Naive Bayes Gaussian Naive Bayes Multinomial Naive Bayes Bernoulli Naive Bayes Complement Naive Bayes 7. Random Forest Bagging Algorithm A powerful model that builds lots of decision trees and combines them for better accuracy and stability. Introduction to Random forest Random Forest Classifier Random Forest Regression Hyperparameter Tuning in Random Forest Introduction to Ensemble Learning Ensemble learning combines multiple simple models to create a stronger, smarter model. There are mainly two types of ensemble learning: Bagging that combines multiple models trained independently. Boosting that builds models sequentially each correcting the errors of the previous one. Module 3: Unsupervised learning Unsupervised learning are again divided into three main categories based on their purpose: Clustering Association Rule Mining Dimensionality Reduction . Unsupervised Learning 1. Clustering Clustering algorithms group data points into clusters based on their similarities or differences. Types of clustering algorithms are: Centroid-based Methods: K-Means clustering Elbow Method for optimal value of k in KMeans K-Means clustering K-Mode clustering Fuzzy C-Means FCM Clustering Distribution-based Methods : Gaussian mixture models Expectation-Maximization Algorithm Dirichlet process mixture models DPMMs Connectivity based methods: Hierarchical clustering Agglomerative Clustering Divisive clustering Affinity propagation Density Based methods: DBSCAN Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise OPTICS Ordering Points To Identify the Clustering Structure 2. Dimensionality Reduction Dimensionality reduction is used to simplify datasets by reducing the number of features while retaining the most important information. Principal Component Analysis PCA t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding t-SNE Non-negative Matrix Factorization NMF Independent Component Analysis ICA Isomap Locally Linear Embedding LLE 3. Association Rule Find patterns between items in large datasets typically in market basket analysis . Apriori algorithm Implementing apriori algorithm FP-Growth Frequent Pattern-Growth ECLAT Equivalence Class Clustering and bottom-up Lattice Traversal Module 4: Reinforcement Learning Reinforcement learning interacts with environment and learn from them based on rewards. Reinforcement Learning

3. Association Rule Find patterns between items in large datasets typically in market basket analysis . Apriori algorithm Implementing apriori algorithm FP-Growth Frequent Pattern-Growth ECLAT Equivalence Class Clustering and bottom-up Lattice Traversal Module 4: Reinforcement Learning Reinforcement learning interacts with environment and learn from them based on rewards. Reinforcement Learning 1. Model-Based Methods These methods use a model of the environment to predict outcomes and help the agent plan actions by simulating potential results. Markov decision processes MDPs Bellman equation Value iteration algorithm Monte Carlo Tree Search 2. Model-Free Methods The agent learns directly from experience by interacting with the environment and adjusting its actions based on feedback. Q-Learning SARSA Monte Carlo Methods Reinforce Algorithm Actor-Critic Algorithm Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic A3C Module 5: Semi Supervised Learning It uses a mix of labeled and unlabeled data making it helpful when labeling data is costly or it is very limited. Semi-Supervised Learning Semi Supervised Classification Self-Training in Semi-Supervised Learning Few-shot learning in Machine Learning Module 6: Deployment of ML Models The trained ML model must be integrated into an application or service to make its predictions accessible. Machine learning deployement Deploy ML Model using Streamlit Library Deploy ML web app on Heroku Create UIs for prototyping Machine Learning model with Gradio APIs allow other applications or systems to access the ML model's functionality and integrate them into larger workflows. Deploy Machine Learning Model using Flask Deploying ML Models as API using FastAPI MLOps ensure they are deployed, monitored and maintained efficiently in real-world production systems. MLOps Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment CICD in MLOps End-to-End MLOps For project ideas refer to: 100 Machine Learning Projects with Source Code 2025 for hands-on implementation on projects Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Python for Machine Learning kartik Follow Improve Article Tags : Machine Learning AI-ML-DS Tutorials Machine Learning Practice Tags : Machine Learning Machine Learning

Courses Placement Data Science IBM GATE Practice Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Our website uses cookies We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got it! All Courses Live Placement Preparation Crash Course - Live Live Course 29k interested Geeks Our intensive Placement Preparation Mastery course is tailored for students and recent graduates, focusing on Data Structures and Algorithms DSA, Computer Networks, Operating System Database Management Systems DBMS, and Quantitative Aptitude. Led by industry standard mentors, you'll engage in interactive sessions to master DSA principles, network protocols, and problem-solving techniques. 12 Weeks 4 Seats Left 29k interested Geeks For further queries reach us via CallWhatsApp at: 91- 9266851324 Course Overview Premium lectures, theoretical resources, and practice tracks 60 hours of content by Industry grade mentors 100 Exclusive Problems for Practice with video editorials and hints 500 MCQs, 30 Full Contests for SDE Experience Structured into basic, advanced, and subjective modules Comprehensive solution for coding interview success Read more What you will learn What you will learn Master Technical Skills : Gain proficiency in DSA, Networks, OS, and DBMS. Solve Complex Problems : Engage in practical exercises to develop real-world solutions. Boost Problem-Solving : Enhance your analysis, design, and implementation abilities. Ace Aptitude Tests : Improve your quantitative and logical reasoning skills. Course Content 01 Week 1 Session 1: Analysis of Algorithm, Mathematics Bit Manipulation Asymptotic Analysis Time and Space Complexity Masters Theorem Bitwise Operators Bitwise AND, Bitwise OR, Bitwise XOR, Left Shift, Right Shift, etc Problems: GCD and LCM, Iterative Power, Generate Power Set, etc Session 2: Arrays Arrays - Introduction and Advantages Types of Arrays Operations of Arrays - Searching, Insertion, and Deletion Sliding Window Technique Problems: Largest Element in an Array, Leaders in an Array Problem, Maximum Subarray Sum, etc 02 Week 2 Session 3: Linked List Introduction to Linked List Traversing a Linked List Insertion and Deletion of Node in Linked List Doubly Linked List and Circular Linked List Problems: Middle of Linked List, Deleting a Node without accessing Head pointer of Linked List, etc Session 4: Stack Stack - Introduction and Applications Stack Operations e.g. push, pop, etc

List Traversing a Linked List Insertion and Deletion of Node in Linked List Doubly Linked List and Circular Linked List Problems: Middle of Linked List, Deleting a Node without accessing Head pointer of Linked List, etc Session 4: Stack Stack - Introduction and Applications Stack Operations e.g. push, pop, etc Array Implementation of Stack Linked List Implementation of Stack Problems: Balanced Parenthesis, Next Greater Element, etc 03 Week 3 Session 5: Queue and Deque Queue - Introduction and Application Implementation of Queue using Array Implementation of Queue using Linked List Deque - Introduction and Application Problems: Generate Numbers with Given Digits, First Circular Tour, etc Session 6: Searching Linear Search Binary Search - Iterative and Recursive Approach Analysis of Binary Search Two Pointer Approach Problems: Index of the first Occurrence in SortedArray, Count 1s in a Sorted Binary Array, Square root of a number, etc 04 Week 4 Session 7: Recursion and Backtracking Introduction to Recursion Writing Base Cases in Recursion Tail Recursion Introduction to Backtracking Problems: Print 1 to N Using Recursion, Rope Cutting Problem, Rat in a Maze, etc Session 8: Sorting Overview of the Sorting Algorithm Sorting Algorithms e.g. Bubble Sort, Selection Sort, Insertion Sort, Merge Sort, Quick Sort with Analysis Stability of Sorting Algorithms Problems: Minimum Difference in an Array, Chocolate Distribution Problem, etc Read more Login to view detailed syllabus Upcoming Batches Batch Mentor STARTING FROM TIMINGS Reviews and Ratings Mehakdeep Singh Placed at JP Morgan Chase It helped me gain a better understanding of the problem, develop an effective approach to tackle it, and apply logical reasoning to resolve it. Reviews and Ratings Saket Bharti Placed at Acuity Knowledge Partners I have read all Placement Preparation Crash course tutorials and regularly practice problems according to the topics. I have also bought a Computer Science fundamentals course, which helps me understand the theoretical concepts of Computer Science. Divyanshu Gahlot Placed at Algocirrus I have taken Placement Preparation course and attended many web development-related courses. The structure of these courses is very well defined and has helped me secure a good job. While everyone in the market is selling their courses, only some are truly useful, and GFG ranks at the top of that list. Keep it up, team!. VIJAY KUMAR Placed at Accenture Improved critical thinking and made me aware of the professional way of approaching a problem. Provides information on time and space complexity

market is selling their courses, only some are truly useful, and GFG ranks at the top of that list. Keep it up, team!. VIJAY KUMAR Placed at Accenture Improved critical thinking and made me aware of the professional way of approaching a problem. Provides information on time and space complexity and the way of utilising those as per our needs. SARTHAK NARANG Placed at Siemens EDA The course gave me a complete structured path of learning and improving myself at my own pace. The best thing was that everything was there at one place. I didn't had to waste time in searching stuff and deviating myself from the topics. Its because of this course i landed a job with CTC of 20 LPA. : Tejas Ghodkhande Placed at Cognologix Technologies, Pune I recently completed the Placement Preparation course on GeeksforGeeks, and I must say it was instrumental in my preparation for technical interviews, eventually helping me secure a placement at Cognologix. The course is well-structured and covers all the essential topics required to build a strong foundation in data structures and algorithms. The explanations are clear, concise, and supported by a plethora of examples and practice problems that solidify the concepts. The flexibility to learn at my own pace allowed me to thoroughly understand complex topics, revisit areas I found challenging, and practice extensively. The coding practice problems and quizzes at the end of each module were particularly useful in reinforcing the learning material. Moreover, the discussion forums and detailed editorials provided invaluable insights whenever I encountered difficulties." View More Testimonials Frequently Asked Questions 01 Do you provide the recordings of the class? 02 Do you get doubt support for this program? 03 How does the admission process work for this course? 04 Is there any number to contact for query? Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With

GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Videos April 26, 2022 3.1K Views Medical Chain Project Blockchain Miscellaneous , Blockchain Save Share 1 Like Description Discussion A blockchain is a distributed database that stores information electronically in a digital format and is shared among the nodes of a computer network. This video focuses on discussing how to solve one of the major issues in society regarding the illegal supply of drugs in the market. The project is created using Ethereum smart contracts to reduce the supply of drugs illegally. This project tracks the cycle of medicine from raw materials used to the hands of consumers. Every step of the medicine cycle, the status of the medicine is tracked. Various features of blockchain help to solve the issue of illegal supply: 1 The decentralization property of blockchain helps to prevent counterfeiting of the supply of medicine in the market. 2 Data immutability gives medicine sales a reliable and trustworthy environment to trade. 3 Events are triggered at every steps to keep a log of changes in blockchain data. Blockchain technology helped to overcome challenges like increased gas prices and scalability of the application. Related article: https:www.geeksforgeeks.orgmed-chain-solidity-project-to-solve-illegal-supply-of-drugs Recommendations 41:15 110 Views 02042024 ... Building a Blockchain App with AMD Instances on Google Cloud Platform Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software

NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Few-shot learning in Machine Learning Last Updated : 08 Jan, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report What is a Few-shot learning? Few-shot learning is a type of meta-learning process. It is a process in which a model possesses the capability to autonomously acquire knowledge and improve its performance through self-learning. It is a process like teaching the model to recognize things or do tasks, but instead of overwhelming it with a lot of examples, it only needs a few. Few-shot learning focuses on enhancing the model's capability to learn quickly and efficiently from new and unseen data. If you want a computer to recognize a new type of car and you show a few pictures of it instead of hundreds of cars. The computer uses this small amount of information and recognizes similar cars on its own. This process is known as few-shot learning. Few-shot learning Terminologies related to Few-shot learning k-ways: It depicts the number of classes a model needs to distinguish or recognize. 2-way means the model needs to classify or generate examples for 2 classes. k-shots: It denote the number of samples per class available during training or evaluation. 1- shot means 1 sample for each class is provided to the model. S number of waysnumber of shots Query Set: Query set refers to additional samples of data. It is also known as a target set. The model uses the query set to evaluate its performance and generalize to new examples. It consists of examples from the same categories present in the support set but distinct from it. Task: Support set Query set. It is a recognition or classification problem given to the model for which it is trained to solve. Training: It is the process of exposing the model to different tasks and support sets. It generalizes the model to classify new tasks efficiently. The motive is to enable the model to perform well on new and unseen tasks of the same categories given in the support set. Test: It involves the process of evaluation in which new unseen tasks are given to the model using query sets that were not seen during the time of training and it is expected by the model to recognize and classify them accurately based on the prior knowledge gained by the support set provided. In few-shot learning, a Model is a pair of identical networks that

the model using query sets that were not seen during the time of training and it is expected by the model to recognize and classify them accurately based on the prior knowledge gained by the support set provided. In few-shot learning, a Model is a pair of identical networks that converge into a node called a similarity function. And it terminates to a sigmoid function returning output if the query is similar or different. Since we are working on a pair of networks, it is called "Siamese Network". Working of Few-shot learning Working on few-shot learning Let us take a sample support dataset of two images ' i ' ' j '. The pair of identical neural networks is represented as ' f '. The embedding produced by the neural networks is represented by ' fi' and 'fj' respectively. These are 64-dimensional vectors. The similarity function takes these two numbers and computes the vector difference. fi-fj2 The similarity function then takes the sum of these values to give us a number Sigma fik-fjk2 After that, we pass this number to the sigmoid function. It has an edge-weighted ' w' and a bias ' b' . Y sigmawSigmafik-fjk2bepsilon0,1 Y here, represents the probability of being similar. If the probability is less than the threshold value 't' , the output would be 0 i.e., The images are of Different classes. If the probability is equal to or greater than threshold value ' t', the output would be 1 i.e., The images belong to the same class. Variations In Few-shot learning One shot learning: In one shot learning, the model is trained with one shot of each class i.e., one example per class. It is difficult to generalize for a model only with help of a single example. There are more chances of errors in the results when the model is trained with one-shot learning. Zero shot learning: In zero shot learning, the model needs to recognize the classes which were not seen on the training time. It has to find a relationship between seen and unseen classes on the basis of some semantic relations or auxiliary information present. N shot learning: In n-shot learning, n number of examples are given to train the model. They are more than one but still less than data required for training in supervised learning . This approach is more reliable for training of a model to

semantic relations or auxiliary information present. N shot learning: In n-shot learning, n number of examples are given to train the model. They are more than one but still less than data required for training in supervised learning . This approach is more reliable for training of a model to get optimized results. Different Algorithms for implementation Siamese Networks: In this approach, a model is a pair of identical networks. These networks are trained to minimize the distance between similar objects and maximize the distance between different objects. If the output is less than threshold value, the classes are different, else, if the output is equal to or greater than threshold value, the classes are similar. Model Agnostic Meta Learning MAML: It is an approach of meta-learning in which the model is trained to adapt new tasks quickly. The model learns an initialization that is fine tuned by some examples for a specific task. It is hard to train as the method is more complex. It does not work well on the few shot learning classification benchmarks as compared to other metric algorithms. Prototypical Networks: In prototype learning, the model learns the prototype of each class based on embedding of its instances. During training, the model minimizes the distance between the embeddings of instances and the prototype for each class. It is an effective measure of implementing few shot learning technique for classification. Triplet Networks: It is an extension to the Siamese Network. It consists of triplets of instances, i.e., Anchor, Positive example, Negative example. The model is trained to minimize the difference between anchor and positive example which is similar to the anchor and maximize the distance between anchor and negative example which is different from the anchor. Matching Networks: Matching networks starts by looking at support set provided to model. Then, when a new query comes, it pays attention to the most similar class present and compare its similarities and dissimilarities with the query set. Matching networks make most of the few examples. Real-World Applications of few shot learning Medical Imaging: In medical imaging, the acquiring of labelled data for rare diseases is difficult. Few-shot learning helps the model to detect brain tumor and classify diseases with few examples available. Medical Imaging using few-shot learning Robotics: Few-shot learning is applied in robotics for tasks like object recognition and manipulation. The robots can adapt to new tasks and environment

data for rare diseases is difficult. Few-shot learning helps the model to detect brain tumor and classify diseases with few examples available. Medical Imaging using few-shot learning Robotics: Few-shot learning is applied in robotics for tasks like object recognition and manipulation. The robots can adapt to new tasks and environment with minimal required support set. Robotics with few-shot learning Image Recognition: The model is trained to recognize images using zero shot learning where it has to classify novel objects into classes which are not seen prior. It is the most common application of zero shot learning in the real world. Image Recognition using few shot learning Advantages of Few-shot learning Reduced data requirement: A lesser amount of data is required to train the model irrespective of supervised learning where a large dataset is given to the model for training. Rapid adaption to new tasks: Models trained using few-shot learning can adapt to new tasks easily using a few examples. This will help in dynamic environments where new tasks emerge. Flexibility of Model: The model is more flexible as it can easily generalize with new and evolving tasks. Lesser time required: The time required for training a model is lesser in few-shot learning as compared to supervised learning due to the small size of the support set. Reduced amount of resources required: The resources required for computation are less in number in the few-shot learning process. Good for specialized tasks: In a certain area, where a limited amount of data is available, few-shot learning can be a practical approach to building effective models. Adaptable to real-world scenarios: In a real-world scenario, where the environment is continuously changing, few-shot learning can be an approach to train a model that can learn by itself. Disadvantages of few-shot learning Less diverse representation: Due to the limited amount of data provided during training, the model will have a less diverse and less robust representation of underlying data. Risk of overfitting: It can be a scenario where the model memorizes the examples given in the support set rather than analyzing the pattern between them. This will result in overfitting where the model will perform well in the support set but poor with the new unseen data. Insufficient data for complex tasks: It can be difficult for a model to find the relationship between the features with a limited amount of examples. It can result in inaccurate

result in overfitting where the model will perform well in the support set but poor with the new unseen data. Insufficient data for complex tasks: It can be difficult for a model to find the relationship between the features with a limited amount of examples. It can result in inaccurate analysis of complex tasks. Sensitive to noise: A model trained using few-shot learning will be sensitive to noise present in the support set. If noisy or incorrect data is present in the support set, it will create a significant impact on the result given by the model. Inefficient for rare classes: A model will find it difficult to recognize when it comes to rare classes due to the small number of examples available for these classes. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article One Shot Learning in Machine Learning S sswatinreg Follow Improve Article Tags : Data Science Machine Learning AI-ML-DS Blogs AI-ML-DS Machine Learning Blogs 1 More Practice Tags : Machine Learning

Understanding Activation Functions in Depth Last Updated : 21 Nov, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report In artificial neural networks, the activation function of a neuron determines its output for a given input. This output serves as the input for subsequent neurons in the network, continuing the process until the network solves the original problem. Consider a binary classification problem , where the goal is to classify an input, such as an image, into one of two categories: 1: The image contains the correct object. 0: The image does not contain the correct object. Here, the activation function helps decide between the two outputs 1 or 0. The sigmoid function is commonly used in binary classification tasks to output probabilities that guide the classification decision. Why Activation Functions Matter in Deep Learning? Without activation functions, a neural network would behave like a simple linear model, unable to capture the complexity required for solving problems like image recognition or natural language processing. Activation functions introduce non-linearity, enabling the network to learn intricate patterns. How Activation Functions Work? Activation functions transforms the raw data into meaningful outputs. Mathematically, they operate on the weighted sum of inputs, adding non-linearity and enabling the network to solve complex problems. 1. Weighted Sum of Inputs Each neuron computes a weighted sum of the inputs as: Texz sum_i1m w_i x_i bTex Here: Texx_iTex : Input features Texw_iTex : Weights associated with each input TexbTex : Bias term This weighted sum TexzTex becomes the input for the activation function. 2. Activation Function The activation function transforms the weighted sum TexZTex into the neurons output. Mathematically: TexyfzTex Where TexfzTex is the activation function. For example, ReLU, Sigmoid, Tanh. We will discuss these activation function in detail in this the next section. 3. Gradient and Optimization Activation functions play a vital role in backpropagation by contributing to the gradient calculation. The gradient of the activation function determines how weights are updated during training: Texfracpartial Lpartial w fracpartial Lpartial y cdot fracpartial ypartial z cdot fracpartial zpartial wTex Here: Texpartial ypartial zTex : Derivative of the activation function Texpartial Lpartial yTex : Loss gradient Texfracpartial zpartial wTex : Weighted input gradient Smooth activation functions like sigmoid and tanh can cause vanishing gradients , while ReLU mitigates this issue, making it popular in deep networks. Types of Activation Functions Activation functions are classified into two main categories: Linear Activation

Texpartial Lpartial yTex : Loss gradient Texfracpartial zpartial wTex : Weighted input gradient Smooth activation functions like sigmoid and tanh can cause vanishing gradients , while ReLU mitigates this issue, making it popular in deep networks. Types of Activation Functions Activation functions are classified into two main categories: Linear Activation Functions and Non-linear Activation Functions . 1. Linear Activation Function A linear activation function calculates the output as a linear combination of inputs. While simple, linear activation functions lack the non-linearity required for learning complex patterns, limiting their use in modern neural networks. 2. Non-linear Activation Functions Non-linear activation functions enable the network to learn complex patterns by introducing non-linearity. This allows the model to generalize effectively across diverse datasets and differentiate outputs. Non-linear means the output cannot be expressed in the form of linear combination of inputs. Key Terms for Non-linear Functions : Derivative : Represents the change in output y-axis with respect to changes in input x-axis. Monotonic Function : A function that is consistently non-increasing or non-decreasing. Non-linear activation functions are further divided based on their range and curves . Lets examine each function in detail: 1. Sigmoid Function The sigmoid function is defined as: Texsigmax frac11 e-xTex Derivative : Texfracddx sigmax sigmax 1 sigmaxTex The derivative saturates for extreme values of TexxTex close to 0 for Texx to -infty text or x to inftyTex , which can lead to the vanishing gradient problem . 2. ReLU Rectified Linear Unit The ReLU function is defined as: Texfx max0, xTex Derivative : Texf'x begincases 1, textif x 0 0, textif x leq 0 endcasesTex The derivative is simple but undefined at Texx 0Tex . By convention, it is often set to 0 at this point. 3. Leaky ReLU The Leaky ReLU function is an extension of ReLU, defined as: Texfx begincases x, textif x 0 alpha x, textif x leq 0 endcasesTex Where TexalphaTex is a small constant e.g., 0.01. Derivative : Texf'x begincases 1, textif x 0 alpha, textif x leq 0 endcasesTex The small gradient for Texx leq 0Tex helps avoid the Dying ReLU problem . 4. Tanh Hyperbolic Tangent The tanh function is defined as: Textanhx fracex e-xex e-xTex Derivative : Texfracddx tanhx 1 tanh2xTex Like the sigmoid function, the tanh derivative also saturates for extreme values of x, leading to the vanishing gradient problem . 5. Softmax The softmax function is defined as: TextextSoftmaxz_i

4. Tanh Hyperbolic Tangent The tanh function is defined as: Textanhx fracex e-xex e-xTex Derivative : Texfracddx tanhx 1 tanh2xTex Like the sigmoid function, the tanh derivative also saturates for extreme values of x, leading to the vanishing gradient problem . 5. Softmax The softmax function is defined as: TextextSoftmaxz_i fracez_isum_j ez_jTex Derivative : For an individual output Texy_iTex : Texfracpartial y_ipartial z_j y_i 1 y_i, textif i jTex Texfracpartial y_ipartial z_j -y_i y_j, textif i neq jTex The derivative depends on all outputs, making it suitable for multi-class classification problems. Why is the Derivative of Activation Functions Important? In the above section, we looked into the derivatives of the activation functions, now lets understand the importance of the derivative of the activation functions. The derivative of activation functions measure how sensitive the output of a function is to changes in its input. This sensitivity, expressed mathematically as the gradient, is essential for optimization during the training process. 1. Enabling Backpropagation The backpropagation algorithm relies on the chain rule of calculus to compute the gradient of the loss function with respect to each weight in the network. This process requires the derivative of the activation function at each layer to adjust the weights effectively. The derivative ensures that the gradient flows backward through the network. For example, the gradient computation for a neuron involves: Texfracpartial Lpartial w fracpartial Lpartial y cdot fracpartial ypartial z cdot fracpartial zpartial wTex Here, Texfracpartial ypartial zTex represents the derivative of the activation function, which determines how the neurons output responds to changes in its input. 2. Guiding Weight Updates During training, the gradient of the activation function helps in determining the magnitude and direction of weight updates. A small or zero derivative can slow down or even halt learning e.g., vanishing gradients with sigmoid or tanh, while an appropriate derivative like ReLUs allows efficient optimization. 3. Handling Vanishing and Exploding Gradients The choice of activation function and its derivative directly impacts gradient stability: Vanishing Gradient Problem : Functions like sigmoid and tanh have derivatives close to zero for large or small inputs, which can cause gradients to shrink as they propagate back through the layers. This leads to slow or ineffective learning. Exploding Gradients : If derivatives become excessively large, the weights can update too drastically, destabilizing the model. Proper choice of activation functions e.g., ReLU or Leaky ReLU mitigates this issue. 4. Improving

Gated Recurrent Unit Networks Last Updated : 05 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report In machine learning Recurrent Neural Networks RNNs are essential for tasks involving sequential data such as text, speech and time-series analysis. While traditional RNNs struggle with capturing long-term dependencies due to the vanishing gradient problem architectures like Long Short-Term Memory LSTM networks were developed to overcome this limitation. However LSTMs are very complex structure with higher computational cost. To overcome this Gated Recurrent Unit GRU where introduced which uses LSTM architecture by merging its gating mechanisms offering a more efficient solution for many sequential tasks without sacrificing performance. In this article well learn more about them. Getting Started with Gated Recurrent Units GRU Gated Recurrent Units GRUs are a type of RNN introduced by Cho et al. in 2014. The core idea behind GRUs is to use gating mechanisms to selectively update the hidden state at each time step allowing them to remember important information while discarding irrelevant details. GRUs aim to simplify the LSTM architecture by merging some of its components and focusing on just two main gates: the update gate and the reset gate . Core Structure of GRUs The GRU consists of two main gates : Update Gate Texz_tTex : This gate decides how much information from previous hidden state should be retained for the next time step. Reset Gate Texr_tTex : This gate determines how much of the past hidden state should be forgotten. These gates allow GRU to control the flow of information in a more efficient manner compared to traditional RNNs which solely rely on hidden state. Equations for GRU Operations The internal workings of a GRU can be described using following equations: 1. Reset gate : TexrtσWrht1,xtTex The reset gate determines how much of the previous hidden state Texh_t-1Tex should be forgotten. 2. Update gate : Texz_t sigmaW_z cdot h_t-1, x_tTex The update gate controls how much of the new information Texx_tTex should be used to update the hidden state. 3. Candidate hidden state : Texh_t tanhW_h cdot r_t cdot h_t-1, x_tTex This is the potential new hidden state calculated based on the current input and the previous hidden state. 4. Hidden state : Texh_t 1 z_t cdot h_t-1 z_t cdot h_t'Tex The final hidden state is a weighted average of the previous hidden state Texh_t-1Tex and the candidate hidden state Tex h_t'Tex based on

potential new hidden state calculated based on the current input and the previous hidden state. 4. Hidden state : Texh_t 1 z_t cdot h_t-1 z_t cdot h_t'Tex The final hidden state is a weighted average of the previous hidden state Texh_t-1Tex and the candidate hidden state Tex h_t'Tex based on the update gate Texz_tTex . How GRUs Solve the Vanishing Gradient Problem Like LSTMs, GRUs were designed to address the vanishing gradient problem which is common in traditional RNNs. GRUs help mitigate this issue by using gates that regulate the flow of gradients during training ensuring that important information is preserved and that gradients do not shrink excessively over time. By using these gates, GRUs maintain a balance between remembering important past information and learning new, relevant data. GRU vs LSTM GRUs are more computationally efficient because they combine the forget and input gates into a single update gate. GRUs do not maintain an internal cell state as LSTMs do, instead they store information directly in the hidden state making them simpler and faster. Feature LSTM Long Short-Term Memory GRU Gated Recurrent Unit Gates 3 Input, Forget, Output 2 Update, Reset Cell State Yes it has cell state No Hidden state only Training Speed Slower due to complexity Faster due to simpler architecture Computational Load Higher due to more gates and parameters Lower due to fewer gates and parameters Performance Often better in tasks requiring long-term memory Performs similarly in many tasks with less complexity Implementation in Python Now lets implement simple GRU model in Python using Keras. Well start by preparing the necessary libraries and dataset. Importing Libraries Python import numpy as np import pandas as pd from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler from tensorflow.keras.models import Sequential from tensorflow.keras.layers import GRU , Dense from tensorflow.keras.optimizers import Adam numpy : For handling numerical data and array manipulations. pandas : For data manipulation and reading datasets CSV files. MinMaxScaler : For normalizing the dataset. tensorflow.keras.models and tensorflow.keras.layers : For building and training the GRU model. Adam : An optimization algorithm used during training. 2. Loading the Dataset The dataset were using is a time-series dataset containing daily temperature data i.e forecasting dataset. It spans 8,000 days starting from January 1, 2010. You can download dataset from here . Python df pd . read_csv 'data.csv' , parse_dates 'Date' , index_col 'Date' print df . head pd.read_csv : Reads a CSV file into a pandas

time-series dataset containing daily temperature data i.e forecasting dataset. It spans 8,000 days starting from January 1, 2010. You can download dataset from here . Python df pd . read_csv 'data.csv' , parse_dates 'Date' , index_col 'Date' print df . head pd.read_csv : Reads a CSV file into a pandas DataFrame. Here, we are assuming that the dataset has a Date column which is set as the index of the DataFrame. date_parserTrue : Ensures that pandas parses the Date column as datetime. Output: Date Temperature 2010-01-01 27.483571 2010-01-02 24.308678 2010-01-03 28.238443 2010-01-04 32.615149 2010-01-05 23.829233 3. Preprocessing the Data Python scaler MinMaxScaler feature_range 0 , 1 scaled_data scaler . fit_transform df . values MinMaxScaler : This scales the data to a range of 0 to 1. This is important because neural networks perform better when input features are scaled properly. 4. Preparing Data for GRU Python def create_dataset data , time_step 1 : X , y , for i in range len data - time_step - 1 : X . append data i : i time_step , 0 y . append data i time_step , 0 return np . array X , np . array y time_step 100 X , y create_dataset scaled_data , time_step X X . reshape X . shape 0 , X . shape 1 , 1 create_dataset : Prepares the dataset for time-series forecasting. It creates sliding windows of time_step length to predict the next time step. X.reshape : Reshapes the input data to fit the expected shape for the GRU which is 3D: samples, time steps, features . 5. Building the GRU Model Python model Sequential model . add GRU units 50 , return_sequences True , input_shape X . shape 1 , 1 model . add GRU units 50 model . add Dense units 1 model . compile optimizer Adam learning_rate 0.001 , loss 'mean_squared_error' GRUunits50 : Adds a GRU layer with 50 units neurons. return_sequencesTrue : Ensures that the GRU layer returns the entire sequence required for stacking multiple GRU layers. Denseunits1 : The output layer which predicts a single value for the next time step. Adam : An adaptive optimizer commonly used in deep learning. 6. Training the Model Python model . fit X , y , epochs 10 , batch_size 32 model.fit : Trains the model on the prepared dataset. The epochs10 specifies the number of iterations over the entire dataset, and

time step. Adam : An adaptive optimizer commonly used in deep learning. 6. Training the Model Python model . fit X , y , epochs 10 , batch_size 32 model.fit : Trains the model on the prepared dataset. The epochs10 specifies the number of iterations over the entire dataset, and batch_size32 defines the number of samples per batch. Output: Epoch 110 247247 26s 86msstep loss: 0.0321 Epoch 210 247247 41s 88msstep loss: 0.0178 Epoch 310 247247 22s 89msstep loss: 0.0188 Epoch 410 247247 41s 89msstep loss: 0.0176 Epoch 510 247247 41s 88msstep loss: 0.0181 Epoch 610 247247 42s 91msstep loss: 0.0179 Epoch 710 247247 40s 88msstep loss: 0.0182 Epoch 810 247247 22s 89msstep loss: 0.0180 Epoch 910 247247 22s 88msstep loss: 0.0177 Epoch 1010 247247 41s 90msstep loss: 0.0174 7. Making Predictions Python input_sequence scaled_data - time_step : . reshape 1 , time_step , 1 predicted_values model . predict input_sequence Input Sequence : The code takes the last 100 temperature values from the dataset scaled_data-time_step: as an input sequence. Reshaping the Input Sequence : The input sequence is reshaped into the shape 1, time_step, 1 because the GRU model expects a 3D input: samples, time_steps, features . Here samples1 because we are making one prediction, time_steps100 the length of the input sequence and features1 because we are predicting only the temperature value. model.predict : Uses the trained model to predict future values based on the input data. Output: 11 0s 64msstep 8. Inverse Transforming the Predictions Inverse Transforming the Predictions refers to the process of converting the scaled normalized predictions back to their original scale. Python predicted_values scaler . inverse_transform predicted_values print f "The predicted temperature for the next day is: predicted_values 0 0 : .2f C" scaler.inverse_transform : Converts the normalized predictions back to their original scale. Output: The predicted temperature for the next day is: 24.86C The output 24.86C is the GRU models prediction for the next days temperature based on the past 100 days of data. The model uses historical patterns to forecast future values and converts the prediction back to the original temperature scale. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article ML Text Generation using Gated Recurrent Unit Networks A AlindGupta Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Machine Learning AI-ML-DS With Python Deep Learning python 1 More Practice Tags : Machine Learning python

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium JavaScript Arrays This section covers the questions for JavaScript Arrays to clear all your concepts. Last Updated : Discuss Comments Question 1 Which of the following statements creates a new empty array? let arr ; let arr new Array0; let arr Array; All of the above Discuss it Question 2 How do you access an element in an array? By using curly braces By using square brackets By using parentheses By using angle brackets Discuss it Question 3 Which of the following array methods can be used to add one or more elements to the end of an array? push pop shift unshift Discuss it Question 4 What is the output of the following code snippet? JavaScript let arr1 1 , 2 , 3 ; let arr2 arr1 ; arr2 . push 4 ; console . log arr1 ; 1, 2, 3 1, 2, 3, 4 2, 3, 4 None of the above Discuss it Question 5 Which of the following array methods can be used to remove the last element from an array? pop shift unshift splice Discuss it Question 6 How do you loop through an array in JavaScript? for i 0; i arr.length; i while i arr.length do while i arr.length for each element in arr Discuss it Question 7 Which of the following array methods can be used to remove one or more elements from an array and replace them with new elements? splice slice concat push Discuss it Question 8 What is the output of the following code snippet? let arr1 1, 2, 3; let arr2 4, 5, 6; let arr3 arr1.concatarr2; console.logarr3; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3 1, 4, 2, 5, 3, 6 None of the above Discuss it Question 9 What is the output of the following code snippet? const arr "apple", "banana", "orange"; const newArr arr.slice1, 2; console.lognewArr; "apple", "banana" "banana", "orange" "banana" "orange" Discuss it Question 10 What is the difference between slice and splice array methods? slice creates a new array, while splice modifies the original array. splice creates a new array, while slice modifies the original array. slice removes elements from the beginning of the array, while splice

"orange" "banana" "orange" Discuss it Question 10 What is the difference between slice and splice array methods? slice creates a new array, while splice modifies the original array. splice creates a new array, while slice modifies the original array. slice removes elements from the beginning of the array, while splice removes elements from the end of the array. splice adds elements to the beginning of the array, while slice adds elements to the end of the array. Discuss it Tags: JavaScript Web Technologies There are 10 questions to complete. Take a part in the ongoing discussion View All Discussion Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Regular Expressions This section covers the questions for Regular Expressions to clear all your concepts. Last Updated : Discuss Comments Question 1 What does the g flag in a regular expression do? Makes the search case-insensitive Enables the search to stop after the first match Searches for all matches globally Allows the use of groups in the regular expression Discuss it Question 2 Which method tests if a string matches a pattern and returns true or false? exec test match search Discuss it Question 3 What will the following code output? JavaScript const regex dg ; console . log "abc123xyz456" . match regex ; "123", "456" 123, 456 "abc", "xyz" Error Discuss it Question 4 How do you validate an email address using regular expressions? Use the pattern a-zA-Z0-9._-a-zA-Z0-9.-.a-zA-Z2, Use the pattern ww.w Use the pattern a-z Use the pattern d Discuss it Question 5 What is the purpose of the exec method in RegExp? Searches a string for a pattern and returns its index Returns a boolean indicating if a match is found Splits a string into an array based on a pattern Returns an array of match details or null if no match is found Discuss it Question 6 What will the following code log? JavaScript const regex ab ; console . log regex . test "aaabb" ; true false null Error Discuss it Question 7 Which method can replace all occurrences of a pattern in a string? replaceAll replace match exec Discuss it Question 8 What is the purpose of the search method in strings? Returns an array of matches Finds the index of the first match Validates a regular expression pattern Replaces the first match with a new string Discuss it Question 9 What does the i flag in a regular expression do? Makes the search case-insensitive Searches for all matches globally Stops the search after the first match Allows the use of groups in the regular expression Discuss it Question 10 Which method is used to check if a string matches a regular expression pattern? exec match search test Discuss it Tags: JavaScript Web Technologies There are 10 questions to complete. Take a part in the ongoing discussion View All Discussion

of groups in the regular expression Discuss it Question 10 Which method is used to check if a string matches a regular expression pattern? exec match search test Discuss it Tags: JavaScript Web Technologies There are 10 questions to complete. Take a part in the ongoing discussion View All Discussion Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium JavaScript Queue This section covers the questions for the Queue using JavaScript to clear all your concepts. Last Updated : Discuss Comments Question 1 How many stacks are needed to implement a queue. Consider the situation where no other data structure like arrays, linked list is available to you. 1 2 3 4 Discuss it Question 2 Which of the following is not a fundamental operation of a queue? A. Enqueue B. Dequeue C. Peek D. Append Discuss it Question 3 Which of the following is not a way to implement a queue in JavaScript? A. Using an array B. Using a linked list C. Using an object D. Using a binary search tree Discuss it Question 4 What is the time complexity of the enqueue operation in a queue implemented as a dynamic array? A. O1 B. Olog n C. On D. On2 Discuss it Question 5 Which of the following is a queue data structure that maintains a fixed-size buffer and overwrites the oldest data? A. Circular queue B. Priority queue C. Double-ended queue D. Deque Discuss it Question 6 Which of the following is an example of a dynamic queue in JavaScript? A. FixedQueue B. LinkedListQueue C. StaticQueue D. PriorityQueue Discuss it Question 7 Which of the following is not a disadvantage of using an array to implement a queue? A. Limited capacity B. Higher memory usage C. Slower dequeue operation D. No constant-time access to the middle elements Discuss it Question 8 Which of the following is not a common application of a queue? A. Implementing a printer job queue B. Implementing a web browser's forward button C. Breadth-first search algorithm D. Storing configuration settings Discuss it Question 9 In a queue implemented using an array, which index corresponds to the front of the queue? A. 0 B. 1 C. The last index D. The middle index Discuss it Question 10 Which of the following operations on a queue data structure has a time complexity of O1? A Enqueue B Dequeue C Peek D Clear A and B B only C only A and D Discuss it Tags: JavaScript Web Technologies There are 10 questions to complete. Take a part in the

of the following operations on a queue data structure has a time complexity of O1? A Enqueue B Dequeue C Peek D Clear A and B B only C only A and D Discuss it Tags: JavaScript Web Technologies There are 10 questions to complete. Take a part in the ongoing discussion View All Discussion Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

What is the difference between SAME and VALID padding in tf.nn.max_pool of tensorflow? Last Updated : 26 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Padding is a technique used in convolutional neural networks CNNs to preserve the spatial dimensions of the input data and prevent the loss of information at the edges of the image. It involves adding additional rows and columns of pixels around the edges of the input data. There are several different ways to apply padding in Python, depending on the type of padding being used. Lets an image of dimension TexI_w times I_h times c Tex is having filtered with TexK_w times K_h Tex dimension kernel with stride Texs_w times s_h Tex then the output shape will be: TexO_w fracI_wK_w1s_w O_h fracI_hK_h1s_hTex Then the output shape will be TexO_wtimes O_h times C Tex Where, C number of filtered channel. For example the image of shape Tex32 times 32 times 3 Tex is filtered with Tex3 times 3 Tex kernel with stride length 2 then the output shape of the image will be. TexO_w frac28-312 13, ; O_h frac28-312 13Tex So, the image shrinks when the convolution is performed. And the corner and edge pixels do have not equal participation. as we can see from the figure below. Padding To resolve this we add extra layers of zeros to our image, which is known as the same padding. Pooling Pooling is a technique used in convolutional neural networks CNNs to reduce the dimensionality of the input while retaining important features. There are several types of pooling operations, such as max pooling, average pooling, and sum pooling. Max pooling is the most commonly used type of pooling in CNNs. In a CNN, the pooling layer is typically inserted between the convolutional layer and the fully connected layer. The purpose of the pooling layer is to reduce the spatial size of the input, which helps to reduce the number of parameters and computational complexity of the model. It also helps to reduce overfitting by reducing the sensitivity of the model to small translations in the input. Max pooling Max pooling works by dividing the input into a set of non-overlapping regions and taking the maximum value from each region. For example, if the input has a size of 5, 5 and the pooling window has a size of 3, 3, the max pooling operation will take

Max pooling Max pooling works by dividing the input into a set of non-overlapping regions and taking the maximum value from each region. For example, if the input has a size of 5, 5 and the pooling window has a size of 3, 3, the max pooling operation will take the maximum value from each 33 window of the input, resulting in an output with a size of 2, 2. Types of padding: Valid Padding same Padding Valid Padding: Valid padding is a technique used in convolutional neural networks CNNs to process the input data without adding any additional rows or columns of pixels around the edges of the data. This means that the size of the output feature map is smaller than the size of the input data. Valid padding is used when it is desired to reduce the size of the output feature map in order to reduce the number of parameters in the model and improve its computational efficiency. Formula to find the output shape of valid padding: TexOutput_w fracI_wK_w1s_w Output_h fracI_hK_h 1s_hTex Where, TexI_w, I_h Tex Number of rows and column of input data. TexK_w, K_h Tex Filter kernel dimensions, Texs_w, s_h Tex Stride Here is an example of how to create a convolutional layer with valid padding and a stride of 2 in the vertical and horizontal dimensions : Python3 import tensorflow as tf from tensorflow.keras.layers import Conv2D input_shape 1 , 28 , 28 , 3 batch_size 1, height28, width28, channels3 x tf.random.normalinput_shape Create a random data with tf.random of input_shape y Conv2Dfilters 3 , the number of output filters in the convolution kernel_size 3 , 3 , filter kernel dimension strides 2 , 2 , Shift along height and width padding 'valid' , padding data_format 'channels_last' , Input shape : batch_size, height, width, channels input_shape input_shape input shape x print 'Output shape :' ,y.shape 1 : y.shape0 : batch_size Outputs: Output shape : 13, 13, 3 In the output, channels will be equal to the filters i.e c 3 Lets calculate the output shape with the formula : TexfracI_wK_w1s_w times fracI_hK_h1s_h times C frac28-312 times frac28-312 times 3 13 times 13 times 3Tex You can also specify different stride values for the vertical and horizontal dimensions by providing a tuple with different values. For example: Python3 import tensorflow as tf from tensorflow.keras.layers import Conv2D input_shape 1 , 28 , 28 , 3 batch_size 1,

times frac28-312 times 3 13 times 13 times 3Tex You can also specify different stride values for the vertical and horizontal dimensions by providing a tuple with different values. For example: Python3 import tensorflow as tf from tensorflow.keras.layers import Conv2D input_shape 1 , 28 , 28 , 3 batch_size 1, height28, width28, channels3 x tf.random.normalinput_shape Create a random data with tf.random of input_shape y Conv2Dfilters 10 , the number of output filters in the convolution kernel_size 2 , 2 , filter kernel dimension strides 3 , 3 , Shift along height and width padding 'valid' , padding data_format 'channels_last' , Input shape : batch_size, height, width, channels input_shape input_shape input shape x print 'Output shape :' ,y.shape 1 : y.shape0 : batch_size Output : Output shape : 9, 9, 10 In the output, channels will be equal to the filters i.e c 10 Lets calculate the output shape with the formula : TexfracI_wK_w1s_w times fracI_hK_h1s_h times C frac28-213 times frac28-213 times 10 9 times 9 times 10Tex When valid padding is used, the output feature map is smaller than the input data because the filters do not extend beyond the edges of the input data. This can result in the loss of information at the edges of the image, which can affect the performance of the CNN. Valid padding is also known as no padding because no padding is applied to the input data before the convolution operation. Lets try with tf.nn.max_pool in TensorFlow to perform max pooling with valid padding and stride 2 Valid Padding Python3 import tensorflow as tf Create a 5x5 input tensor input_tensor tf.constant 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 Reshape the input tensor to batch_size, height, width, channels input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor, axis 0 input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor, axis 3 print 'Input Tensor shape:' , input_tensor.shape Perform max pooling with a window size of 3x3 and a stride of 2 output_tensor tf.nn.max_pool input input_tensor, ksize 1 , 3 , 3 , 1 , kernel size, equivalent to 3,3 strides 2 , stride, equivalent to 1, 2, 2, 1, padding 'VALID' Print the output tensor print 'noutput_tensor :n' ,output_tensor Output : Input Tensor shape: 1, 5, 5,

a stride of 2 output_tensor tf.nn.max_pool input input_tensor, ksize 1 , 3 , 3 , 1 , kernel size, equivalent to 3,3 strides 2 , stride, equivalent to 1, 2, 2, 1, padding 'VALID' Print the output tensor print 'noutput_tensor :n' ,output_tensor Output : Input Tensor shape: 1, 5, 5, 1 output_tensor : tf.Tensor 13 15 23 25, shape1, 2, 2, 1, dtypeint32 Code Explanation In this code, a 55 input tensor is created using the tf.constant function. This input tensor represents a 2D array with 5 rows and 5 columns, and its values are set to the integers from 1 to 25. Next, the input tensor is reshaped to batch_size, height, width, channels using the tf.expand_dims function. The axis parameter specifies the dimension along which to expand the shape of the tensor. In this case, the input tensor is expanded along the first and third dimensions, resulting in an input tensor with shape 1, 5, 5, 1. Then, the tf.nn.max_pool function is used to perform max pooling on the input tensor. The function takes in the input tensor, the size of the pooling window ksize, the stride of the sliding window strides, and the type of padding to use padding. In this example, the pooling window has a size of 1, 3, 3, 1, which means that the window will be 33. The stride is set to 2 or 1, 2, 2, 1, which means that the window will move 2 units in both the height and width directions. The padding is set to VALID, which means that no padding will be used. Finally, the output tensor is printed using the print function. The output tensor will have a shape of 1, 2, 2, 1, and it will contain the maximum values from each 33 window of the input tensor. Here is an example of using tf.nn.max_pool in TensorFlow to perform max pooling with valid padding and stride 1 Valid Padding Stride 1 Python3 import tensorflow as tf Create a 5x5 input tensor input_tensor tf.constant 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 Reshape the input tensor to batch_size, height, width, channels input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor, axis 0 input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor,

8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 Reshape the input tensor to batch_size, height, width, channels input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor, axis 0 input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor, axis 3 print 'Input Tensor shape:' , input_tensor.shape Perform max pooling with a window size of 3x3 and a stride of 1 output_tensor tf.nn.max_pool input input_tensor, ksize 1 , 3 , 3 , 1 , kernel size, equivalent to 3,3 strides 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , stride, equivalent to 1 shift padding 'VALID' padding valid Print the output tensor print 'noutput_tensor :n' ,output_tensor Outputs: Input Tensor shape: 1, 5, 5, 1 output_tensor : tf.Tensor 13 14 15 18 19 20 23 24 25, shape1, 3, 3, 1, dtypeint32 With a kernel size of 3,3 and a stride of 1, the pooling window will move 1 unit in both the height and width directions. This will result in an output tensor with a shape of 1, 3, 3, 1, and it will contain the maximum values from each 33 window of the input tensor. Same Padding: The same padding is another technique used in convolutional neural networks CNNs to process the input data. Unlike valid padding, same padding adds additional rows and columns of pixels around the edges of the input data so that the size of the output feature map is the same as the size of the input data. This is achieved by adding rows and columns of pixels with a value of zero around the edges of the input data before the convolution operation. The same padding is implemented in CNNs by specifying the same option when creating a convolutional layer. For example, in Python using the Keras library, a convolutional layer with same padding can be created as follows: The formula for calculating the output shape for the same padding TexOutput_w fracI_w2pK_ws_w 1 Output_h fracI_h2pK_hs_h 1Tex Where, TexI_w, I_h Tex Number of rows and column of input image. TexK_w, K_h Tex Filter kernel dimensions. Texs_w, s_h Tex Strides p Number of layer of zeros. For same output shape: stride 1 and TexfracI_w2pK_ws_w 1 I_w I_w2pK_w 1 I_w p frac K_w-12Tex Python import tensorflow as tf from tensorflow.keras.layers import Conv2D input_shape 1 , 28 , 28 , 3 batch_size 1, height28, width28, channels3 x tf.random.normalinput_shape

Texs_w, s_h Tex Strides p Number of layer of zeros. For same output shape: stride 1 and TexfracI_w2pK_ws_w 1 I_w I_w2pK_w 1 I_w p frac K_w-12Tex Python import tensorflow as tf from tensorflow.keras.layers import Conv2D input_shape 1 , 28 , 28 , 3 batch_size 1, height28, width28, channels3 x tf.random.normalinput_shape Create a random data with tf.random of input_shape y Conv2Dfilters 3 , the number of output filters in the convolution kernel_size 3 , 3 , filter kernel dimension strides 1 , 1 Shift along height and width padding 'same' , padding data_format 'channels_last' , Input shape : batch_size, height, width, channels input_shape input_shape input shape x print 'Output shape :' ,y.shape 1 : y.shape0 : batch_size Output: Output shape : 28, 28, 3 In the output, channels will be equal to the filters i.e c 3 Lets calculate the output shape with the formula : TexO_w fracI_w2pK_ws_w 1 frac282times1-31 1 28 O_h fracI_h2pK_hs_h 1 frac282times1-31 1 28Tex Specify different stride values for the vertical and horizontal dimensions by providing a tuple with different values. For example: Python3 import tensorflow as tf from tensorflow.keras.layers import Conv2D input_shape 1 , 28 , 28 , 3 batch_size 1, height28, width28, channels3 x tf.random.normalinput_shape Create a random data with tf.random of input_shape y Conv2Dfilters 10 , the number of output filters in the convolution kernel_size 3 , 3 , filter kernel dimension strides 1 , 3 , 1 Shift along height and width padding 'same' , padding data_format 'channels_last' , Input shape : batch_size, height, width, channels input_shape input_shape input shape x print 'Output shape :' ,y.shape 1 : y.shape0 : batch_size Output: Output shape : 28, 10, 10 In the output, channels will be equal to the filters i.e c 3 Lets calculate the output shape with the formula : TexO_w fracI_w2pK_ws_w 1 frac282times1-31 1 28 O_h fracI_h2pK_hs_h 1 frac282times1-33 1 91 10Tex This would create a convolutional layer with a stride of 1 in the vertical dimension and a stride of 3 in the horizontal dimension. When the same padding is used, the output feature map has the same size as the input data because the filters are applied to the input data with additional rows and columns of zero padding around the edges. This can help to preserve the information at the edges of the image and improve the performance of the CNN. Max pool with same padding and stride 2

input data because the filters are applied to the input data with additional rows and columns of zero padding around the edges. This can help to preserve the information at the edges of the image and improve the performance of the CNN. Max pool with same padding and stride 2 Same Padding Python3 import tensorflow as tf Create a 5x5 input tensor input_tensor tf.constant 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 Reshape the input tensor to batch_size, height, width, channels input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor, axis 0 input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor, axis 3 print 'Input Tensor shape:' , input_tensor.shape Perform max pooling with a window size of 3x3 and a stride of 1 output_tensor tf.nn.max_pool input input_tensor, ksize 1 , 3 , 3 , 1 , kernel size, equivalent to 3,3 strides 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 , stride, equivalent to 1 shift padding 'SAME' padding SAME Print the output tensor print 'noutput_tensor :n' ,output_tensor Output: Input Tensor shape: 1, 5, 5, 1 output_tensor : tf.Tensor 7 8 9 10 10 12 13 14 15 15 17 18 19 20 20 22 23 24 25 25 22 23 24 25 25, shape1, 5, 5, 1, dtypeint32 Code Explanation In this code, a 55 input tensor is created using the tf.constant function. This input tensor represents a 2D array with 5 rows and 5 columns, and its values are set to the integers from 1 to 25. Next, the input tensor is reshaped to batch_size, height, width, channels using the tf.expand_dims function. The axis parameter specifies the dimension along which to expand the shape of the tensor. In this case, the input tensor is expanded along the 0th and 3rd dimensions, resulting in a tensor with shape 1, 5, 5, 1. Then, the tf.nn.max_pool function is used to perform max pooling on the input tensor. The function takes in the input tensor, the size of the pooling window ksize, the stride of the sliding window strides, and the type of padding to use padding. In this example, the pooling window has a size of 1, 3, 3, 1, which means that the window will be 33. The stride is set to 1,

the size of the pooling window ksize, the stride of the sliding window strides, and the type of padding to use padding. In this example, the pooling window has a size of 1, 3, 3, 1, which means that the window will be 33. The stride is set to 1, 1, 1, 1, which means that the window will move 1 unit in both the height and width directions. The padding is set to SAME, which means that padding will be added to the input tensor so that the output has the same size as the input. Finally, the output tensor is printed using the print function. The output tensor will have as same as the input tensor of shape 1, 5, 5, 1, and it will contain the maximum values from each 33 window of the input tensor and stride 1. Max pool with same padding and stride 2 Same Padding Python3 import tensorflow as tf Create a 5x5 input tensor input_tensor tf.constant 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 Reshape the input tensor to batch_size, height, width, channels input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor, axis 0 input_tensor tf.expand_dimsinput_tensor, axis 3 print 'Input Tensor shape:' , input_tensor.shape Perform max pooling with a window size of 3x3 and a stride of 1 output_tensor tf.nn.max_pool input input_tensor, ksize 1 , 3 , 3 , 1 , kernel size, equivalent to 3,3 strides 2 , stride, equivalent to 2 shift padding 'SAME' padding SAME Print the output tensor print 'noutput_tensor :n' ,output_tensor Output: Input Tensor shape: 1, 5, 5, 1 output_tensor : tf.Tensor 7 9 10 17 19 20 22 24 25, shape1, 3, 3, 1, dtypeint32 Explanation The output tensor has a shape of 1, 3, 3, 1 and contains the maximum values from each 33 window of the input tensor. The maximum value from the first 33 window is 7, the maximum value from the second 33 window is 9, and so on. With same padding and a stride of 2, the output tensor has the size of1, 3, 3, 1. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Convolutional Neural Network CNN Architectures S sumeshk333 Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium dsa sp javascript queue Question 6 Last Updated : Discuss Comments Which of the following is an example of a dynamic queue in JavaScript? A. FixedQueue B. LinkedListQueue C. StaticQueue D. PriorityQueue This question is part of this quiz : JavaScript Queue Tags: Programming Language JavaScript Web Technologies Share your thoughts in the comments Add Your Comment GeeksforGeeks Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Placement Data Science IBM GATE Practice Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Our website uses cookies We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got it! All Courses Live DevOps Engineering - Planning to Production Live Course 106k interested Geeks Get ready to revolutionize your process take your career to the next level with this DevOps - Live course! Gain insights from industry experts on how to make your workflow more efficient improve the ability to quickly release high-quality software. Beginner to Advance 12 Weeks 3 Seats Left 106k interested Geeks Track-based Learning Course Certificate Capstone Projects Industry Experts GFG Offer Extended - Ends Sunday! Grab Your 40 Discount NOW!! For further queries reach us via CallWhatsApp on: 91-9717109852 Course Overview Live interactive sessions A comprehensive curriculum designed to take you from beginner to advanced levels Practical exercises and projects to help you apply your knowledge and skills AWS Cloud Practitioner Course with 14 Hands-on labs Contests for self assessment Linux and Shell Scripting Recorded Content Git and Github Recorded Content Complete Hands On Projetcs Read more What Sets Us Apart Project-Based Learning 24 X 7 Doubt Support Recognised Certification Expert Mentors Project-Based Learning Hands-on, practical exercises designed to enhance your learning experience and reinforce the concepts covered in the course. These projects serve as crucial components in the learning journey, as they allow you to apply the knowledge and skills gained in real-world scenarios. For eg: multi-container app using Docker Compose etc. Read more What Sets Us Apart Project-Based Learning Hands-on, practical exercises designed to enhance your learning experience and reinforce the concepts covered in the course. These projects serve as crucial componen Read more... 24 X 7 Doubt Support A dedicated service provided with this course for free to help you overcome any doubt, at any time, and anywhere. So unlea Read more... Recognised Certification Boost your coding street cred! Excel in the tech landscape with our comprehensive course and prestigious certificates that Read more... Expert Mentors With a passion for teaching, our mentors sessions will provide tailored guidance to all the aspiring coders . Launch a successful tech career

unlea Read more... Recognised Certification Boost your coding street cred! Excel in the tech landscape with our comprehensive course and prestigious certificates that Read more... Expert Mentors With a passion for teaching, our mentors sessions will provide tailored guidance to all the aspiring coders . Launch a successful tech career with Read more... Course Content 01 Week 1 - Automation Using Shell Scripting RedHat Linux Administration Session 1: Getting Started With Red Hat Linux Red Hat Linux Administration Introduction to Red Hat Linux File System Management User and Group Administration Package Management with Yum System Services and Systems Networking Configuration Networking Concepts - SNAT, DNAT, IP, Netmask Security and Permissions System Performance Monitoring Storage Management Backup and Restore Session 2: Shell Scripting Basics of Shell Scripting Real-Time Scenarios in Shell Scripting 02 Week 2 - Cloud Services AWS Fundamentals Session 3: AWS Global Infrastructure and EC2 Basics Overview of AWS Global Infrastructure Detailed Overview of Elastic Compute Cloud EC2 Setting Up Your First EC2 Instance In-Depth Guide to EC2 Instance Configuration Exploring EC2 Options in Detail Connecting to Cloud Instances Session 4: Advanced AWS Services and Security Security Group Handling and Management Introduction to Amazon S3 Auto Scaling and Load Balancing Understanding Cloud Formation and CloudWatch Exploring Simple Notification Service SNS and Simple Queue Service SQS Overview of Relational Database Service RDS and Identity and Access Management IAM Project-Based Learning: ECS and ECR Serverless Architecture Utilizing CloudWatch for Monitoring and Setting Billing Alarms 03 Week 3 - Source Code Management Networking Concepts Session 5: Mastering Git for Version Control Difference between CVCS and DVCS Importance of Git Installation of Git Git three-stage Architecture Detailed explanation of Repository, Commit, Tags, Snapshots, Push-Pull Mechanism, and Branching Strategy Working with Git stash and Git pop Resolve Merge conflicts in Git Git Revert and Reset Reset vs Revert Git rebase Working with git Squash Git cherry pick What is Git fork? Session 6: Integrating GitHub with VScode and Networking Fundamentals Git Integration on VScode, Git Authentication with Github via SSH and HTTPS Protocol Github Introduction, Creating Repositories, PRs Networking Concepts in Detail How Systems Communicate LANWAN Switch, Router IP IP address and its types OSI Model Subnetting DNS Basics Switching Routing 04 Week 4 - Package Management Docker Using Real-Time Scenarios Understanding SonarQube Session 7: Conceptual Concepts of Dockers What is Virtualization before deep dive into Containerization O.S level virtualization Docker vs Virtual Machine

Communicate LANWAN Switch, Router IP IP address and its types OSI Model Subnetting DNS Basics Switching Routing 04 Week 4 - Package Management Docker Using Real-Time Scenarios Understanding SonarQube Session 7: Conceptual Concepts of Dockers What is Virtualization before deep dive into Containerization O.S level virtualization Docker vs Virtual Machine What is Docker and its History Docker Architecture Advantages and limitations of Docker Components of Docker Docker Daemon, Docker Client, Docker Host Docker Image Docker lifecycle Docker Image TAR and Unarchive, Docker container states, Docker Networking Create and Manage, Dockerfile and CD flow CD Tools with Docker Integrating CD tools like Jenkins and Github action using projects Docker Networking Docker Security Introduction Docker volume Session 8: SonarQube, Quality Gates, and Profiles Understanding SonarQube's Role in Code Quality Assessment Implementing Quality Gates to Ensure Code Quality Standards Configuring and Managing SonarQube Profiles for Code Analysis Read more Login to view detailed syllabus Upcoming Batches Batch Mentor STARTING FROM TIMINGS Reviews and Ratings Prince Akash Placed at Worldline Global Services This Course was taught from basic to advance with right pace to understand all the concepts very clearly. It was very interactive session as I interacted a lot with my online mentor Pranjal while he was explaning things. This led me to understand devops tech stacks from very basic which led me to clear multiple interviews. Reviews and Ratings Vineet Jhajhria Placed at Tifin Fintech This course has been immensely valuable for gaining knowledge in the DevOps industry. The mentors at GFG are highly professional and possess a deep understanding of both theoretical principles and practical applications. Overall, my experience with GFG has been excellent. Abhishek Thakur Placed at R1 RCM Taking the DevOps Engineering - Planning to Production course was a crucial step in my path to landing a job at R1 RCM. This course gave me practical know-how and hands-on experience with DevOps tools, which I now use in my job at R1 RCM. The course's focus on real-world projects and skills like teamwork and problem-solving made a big difference in my job hunt. I owe my success at R1 RCM to this course, and I'd recommend it to anyone looking to break into the world of DevOps. Ameya Dhake Got Placed at eQ Technologic This course helped me to understand various concepts of Git, GitHub, Amazon AWS, Docker, Kubernetes. It was a great learning journey with GeeksforGeeks. vikram sankhala

RCM to this course, and I'd recommend it to anyone looking to break into the world of DevOps. Ameya Dhake Got Placed at eQ Technologic This course helped me to understand various concepts of Git, GitHub, Amazon AWS, Docker, Kubernetes. It was a great learning journey with GeeksforGeeks. vikram sankhala Got Placed at IndiaBixFamily The instructor has a very deep practical understanding and patiently covers the DevOps framework very well. The course is hands-on with the latest industry tools, including Git, Docker, Kubernetes, Ansible and Terraform. This course is just the one I was looking for. Nikhil Lokesh Got Placed at Wipro This course is easy to understand and very helpful for beginners. When I enrolled for this I was not sure how it is going to be but it was an easy journey. There is a lot to learn, it helped me to learn and grow in my day to day work. The mentor had great knowledge, he made the concepts clear. Totally worth enrolling. With the help of this course I was able to crack the interview at Wipro. View More Testimonials Frequently Asked Questions 01 Is there any number to contact for query? 02 What is the size of a batch? 03 Can I make the payment through PayPal? 04 Do we have doubt support in this program? Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation person_outline Profile description Contributions school Colleges business Companies people_outline Campus Ambassadors S shashikantv2wi Current POTD Streak STREAK 00 1371 days Longest streakGlobal longest streak Institution Madurai Kamaraj University MKU Madurai Coding Score __ Problem Solved __ Contest Rating __ Apply for Campus Ambassador 33 points Contributor 33 points Contributor 1 Point Proficient Proficient 100 Point Scholar Scholar 1k Point Master Master 10k Point Ace Ace 50k Point Find Your Place Among the Best Explore Our Badge Program and Start Writing. Start writing How Badges Work 0 submissions in current year Current 2024 2023 January February March April May close S person_outline Profile description Contributions school Colleges business Companies people_outline Campus Ambassadors Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium JavaScript - Beg to Adv - Arrays Question 8 Last Updated : Discuss Comments What is the difference between slice and splice array methods? slice creates a new array, while splice modifies the original array. splice creates a new array, while slice modifies the original array. slice removes elements from the beginning of the array, while splice removes elements from the end of the array. splice adds elements to the beginning of the array, while slice adds elements to the end of the array. This question is part of this quiz : JavaScript Arrays Tags: JavaScript Web Technologies Share your thoughts in the comments Add Your Comment GeeksforGeeks Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Verbal Analogy Last Updated : Discuss Comments Question 1 CANDLE : FLAME Brush : Painting Pen : Paper Match : Fire Book : Library Discuss it Question 2 TOMATO : FRUIT Rose : Flower Apple : Tree Carrot : Vegetable Dog : Mammal Discuss it Question 3 SINGER : SONG Athlete : Game Chef : Recipe Dancer : Movement Painter : Artwork Discuss it Question 4 SUN : DAY Moon : Night Cloud : Sky Star : Evening Earth : Year Discuss it Question 5 DOCTOR : MEDICINE Lawyer : Law Chef : Ingredients Teacher : Lesson Engineer : Design Discuss it Question 6 BEE : HONEY Bird : Nest Cow : Milk Tree : Leaf Fish : Water Discuss it Question 7 STUDENT : CLASSROOM Teacher : School Writer : Office Driver : Car Doctor : Hospital Discuss it Question 8 SWORD : FIGHT Pen : Write Hammer : Nail Rifle : Shoot Axe : Chopping Discuss it Question 9 TEACHER : KNOWLEDGE Farmer : Crop Author : Book Doctor : Medicine Artist : Creativity Discuss it Question 10 ROOT : TREE Engine : Car Foundation : Building Branch : Plant Fuel : Fire Discuss it Tags: Reasoning Placements Aptitude There are 10 questions to complete. Take a part in the ongoing discussion View All Discussion Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer

Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium dsa sp javascript queue Question 4 Last Updated : Discuss Comments Which of the following is not a disadvantage of using an array to implement a queue? A. Limited capacity B. Higher memory usage C. Slower dequeue operation D. No constant-time access to the middle elements This question is part of this quiz : JavaScript Queue Tags: Programming Language JavaScript Web Technologies Share your thoughts in the comments Add Your Comment GeeksforGeeks Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium Aptitude Verbal Analogy Question 7 Last Updated : Discuss Comments STUDENT : CLASSROOM Teacher : School Writer : Office Driver : Car Doctor : Hospital This question is part of this quiz : Verbal Analogy Tags: Reasoning Placements Aptitude Share your thoughts in the comments Add Your Comment GeeksforGeeks Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation DSA Practice Problems C C Java Python Data Science Machine Learning Courses Linux DevOps SQL Web Development System Design Aptitude Projects GfG Premium HCF Last Updated : Discuss Comments Question 1 Which is the largest number that divides 17, 23, 35, 59 to leave the same remainder in each case ? 2 3 6 12 Discuss it Question 2 Express 252 as a product of primes. 2 2 3 3 7 3 3 3 3 7 2 2 2 3 7 2 3 3 3 7 Discuss it Question 3 The HCF of two numbers is 36, and their LCM is 1296. If one of the numbers is 144, what is the other number? 288 324 216 252 Discuss it Question 4 The HCF of two numbers is 15, and their LCM is 180. If one of the numbers is 45, what is the other number? 60 30 75 90 Discuss it Question 5 Express 10951168 in its simplest form. 1316 1516 1726 2526 Discuss it Question 6 Find the highest common factor HCF of the following three products of numbers: 4273125 89257 168151149 180 360 540 1260 Discuss it Question 7 Calculate the HCF of 36 and 84. 4 6 12 18 Discuss it Question 8 Calculate the HCF of 1.08, 0.36 and 0.9. 0.03 0.9 0.18 0.108 Discuss it Question 9 Three numbers are in the ratio 1:2:3 and their HCF is 12. The numbers are: 4, 8, 12 5, 10, 15 10, 20, 30 12, 24, 36 Discuss it Question 10 The sum of two numbers is 528 and their HCF is 33. The number of pairs of numbers satisfying the above condition is: 4 6 3 5 Discuss it Tags: QA Placement Quizzes There are 15 questions to complete. Take a part in the ongoing discussion View All Discussion Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA

Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Courses Tutorials Practice Contests Data Structure Java Python HTML Interview Preparation person_outline Profile description Contributions school Colleges business Companies people_outline Campus Ambassadors vanshgaur14866 Current POTD Streak STREAK 00 1371 days Longest streakGlobal longest streak Institution ABES Engineering College Ghaziabad 1797 Rank Institute Rank Language Used Python, Java Coding Score 62 Problem Solved 50 Contest Rating __ Campus Ambassador campun7as 5406 points Contributor 5406 points Contributor 1 Point Proficient Proficient 100 Point Scholar Scholar 1k Point Master Master 10k Point Ace Ace 50k Point Find Your Place Among the Best Explore Our Badge Program and Start Writing. Start writing How Badges Work 0 submissions in current year Current 2024 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 January February March April May SCHOOL 2 BASIC 25 EASY 19 MEDIUM 4 HARD 0 Kadane's Algorithm Sort 0s, 1s and 2s Reverse each word in a given string Maximum Score of Array Find Transition Point Index of an Extra Element Swap the array elements Power of 2 Anagram Reverse Words Panagram Checking Parenthesis Checker Search in a Row-Column sorted matrix Bitonic Point Check if the number is balanced Remove Duplicates Two Sum - Pair with Given Sum Segregate 0s and 1s Count the Zeros Palindrome String Sieve of Eratosthenes Happy Number Unleashing the Array's Potential Sort String Power of Four First Occurence Peak element Count Odd and Even Sorted Array Search Check if a string is Isogram or not Sum of Array Change the string Convert a list of characters into a String Fighting the darkness Remove Spaces Max and Min Product from 2 Arrays The Penalty Shootout Largest Element in Array Game with nos Ishaan Loves Chocolates Minimum number to form the sum even Multiply left and right array sum Red OR Green Convert String to LowerCase Reverse a String Check an Integer is power of 3 or not Sum of elements in a matrix Swap two numbers Search in a 2D Matrix Arrays Sum of array close V person_outline Profile description Contributions school Colleges business Companies people_outline Campus Ambassadors Corporate Communications Address: A-143, 7th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201305 Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android

Registered Address: K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305 Advertise with us Company About Us Legal Privacy Policy In Media Contact Us Advertise with us GFG Corporate Solution Placement Training Program Languages Python Java C PHP GoLang SQL R Language Android Tutorial Tutorials Archive DSA Data Structures Algorithms DSA for Beginners Basic DSA Problems DSA Roadmap Top 100 DSA Interview Problems DSA Roadmap by Sandeep Jain All Cheat Sheets Data Science ML Data Science With Python Data Science For Beginner Machine Learning ML Maths Data Visualisation Pandas NumPy NLP Deep Learning Web Technologies HTML CSS JavaScript TypeScript ReactJS NextJS Bootstrap Web Design Python Tutorial Python Programming Examples Python Projects Python Tkinter Python Web Scraping OpenCV Tutorial Python Interview Question Django Computer Science Operating Systems Computer Network Database Management System Software Engineering Digital Logic Design Engineering Maths Software Development Software Testing DevOps Git Linux AWS Docker Kubernetes Azure GCP DevOps Roadmap System Design High Level Design Low Level Design UML Diagrams Interview Guide Design Patterns OOAD System Design Bootcamp Interview Questions Inteview Preparation Competitive Programming Top DS or Algo for CP Company-Wise Recruitment Process Company-Wise Preparation Aptitude Preparation Puzzles School Subjects Mathematics Physics Chemistry Biology Social Science English Grammar Commerce World GK GeeksforGeeks Videos DSA Python Java C Web Development Data Science CS Subjects GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved We use cookies to ensure you have the best browsing experience on our website. By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understood our Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Got It !

Dilated Convolution Last Updated : 14 Apr, 2023 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Prerequisite: Convolutional Neural Networks Dilated Convolution: It is a technique that expands the kernel input by inserting holes between its consecutive elements. In simpler terms, it is the same as convolution but it involves pixel skipping, so as to cover a larger area of the input. Dilated convolution, also known as atrous convolution, is a type of convolution operation used in convolutional neural networks CNNs that enables the network to have a larger receptive field without increasing the number of parameters. In a regular convolution operation, a filter of a fixed size slides over the input feature map, and the values in the filter are multiplied with the corresponding values in the input feature map to produce a single output value. The receptive field of a neuron in the output feature map is defined as the area in the input feature map that the filter can see. The size of the receptive field is determined by the size of the filter and the stride of the convolution. In contrast, in a dilated convolution operation, the filter is dilated by inserting gaps between the filter values. The dilation rate determines the size of the gaps, and it is a hyperparameter that can be adjusted. When the dilation rate is 1, the dilated convolution reduces to a regular convolution. The dilation rate effectively increases the receptive field of the filter without increasing the number of parameters, because the filter is still the same size, but with gaps between the values. This can be useful in situations where a larger receptive field is needed, but increasing the size of the filter would lead to an increase in the number of parameters and computational complexity. Dilated convolutions have been used successfully in various applications, such as semantic segmentation, where a larger context is needed to classify each pixel, and audio processing, where the network needs to learn patterns with longer time dependencies. Some advantages of dilated convolutions are: Increased receptive field without increasing parameters Can capture features at multiple scales Reduced spatial resolution loss compared to regular convolutions with larger filters Some disadvantages of dilated convolutions are: Reduced spatial resolution in the output feature map compared to the input feature map Increased computational cost compared to regular convolutions with the same filter size and stride References: Holschneider, M.,

multiple scales Reduced spatial resolution loss compared to regular convolutions with larger filters Some disadvantages of dilated convolutions are: Reduced spatial resolution in the output feature map compared to the input feature map Increased computational cost compared to regular convolutions with the same filter size and stride References: Holschneider, M., Kronland-Martinet, R., Morlet, J., Tchamitchian, P. 1989. A real-time algorithm for signal analysis with the help of the wavelet transform. In Wavelets pp. 286-297. Springer. Yu, F., Koltun, V. 2016. Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07122. Chen, L. C., Papandreou, G., Kokkinos, I., Murphy, K., Yuille, A. L. 2018. Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 404, 834-848. An additional parameter l dilation factor tells how much the input is expanded. In other words, based on the value of this parameter, l-1 pixels are skipped in the kernel. Fig 1 depicts the difference between normal vs dilated convolution. In essence, normal convolution is just a 1-dilated convolution . Fig 1: Normal Convolution vs Dilated Convolution Intuition: Dilated convolution helps expand the area of the input image covered without pooling. The objective is to cover more information from the output obtained with every convolution operation. This method offers a wider field of view at the same computational cost. We determine the value of the dilation factor l by seeing how much information is obtained with each convolution on varying values of l . By using this method, we are able to obtain more information without increasing the number of kernel parameters. In Fig 1 , the image on the left depicts dilated convolution. On keeping the value of l 2, we skip 1 pixel l 1 pixel while mapping the filter onto the input, thus covering more information in each step. Formula Involved: where, Fs Input kt Applied Filter l l- dilated convolution F lkp Output Advantages of Dilated Convolution: Using this method rather than normal convolution is better as: Larger receptive field i.e. no loss of coverage Computationally efficient as it provides a larger coverage on the same computation cost Lesser Memory consumption as it skips the pooling step implementation No loss of resolution of the output image as we dilate instead of performing pooling Structure of this convolution helps in maintaining the order of the data. Code Implementation: Python3 import numpy

a larger coverage on the same computation cost Lesser Memory consumption as it skips the pooling step implementation No loss of resolution of the output image as we dilate instead of performing pooling Structure of this convolution helps in maintaining the order of the data. Code Implementation: Python3 import numpy as np import tensorflow as tf import sys from scipy.signal import convolve2d np.random.seed 678 tf.random.set_seed 6789 sess tf.compat.v1.Session Initializing a 9x9 matrix of zeros. mat_size 9 matrix np.zerosmat_size,mat_size.astypenp.float32 Assigning 1's in the middle of matrix to create a random input matrix for x in range 4 , 7 : for y in range 3 , 6 : matrixy,x 1 Creating a random kernel for test kernel np.array 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 .astypenp.float32 print "Original Matrix Shape : " ,matrix.shape print matrix print 'n' print "Original kernel Shape : " ,kernel.shape print kernel self-initializing a dilated kernel. dilation factor 3 dilated_kernel np.array 1 , 0 , 0 , 2 , 0 , 0 , 3 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 4 , 0 , 0 , 5 , 0 , 0 , 6 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 7 , 0 , 0 , 8 , 0 , 0 , 9 print 'n' print "Dilated kernel Shape : " ,dilated_kernel.shape print dilated_kernel print 'n' print "DILATED CONVOLUTION RESULTS Dilation Factor 3" output convolve2dmatrix,dilated_kernel,mode 'valid' print "Numpy Results Shape: " ,output.shape print output Output The following output is obtained from the above code. Output The output obtained is for a dilation factor of 3. For more experimentation, you can initialize the dilated_kernel with different values of the Dilation factor and observe the changes in the output obtained. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Continuous Kernel Convolution P prakharr0y Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Machine Learning python Practice Tags : Machine Learning python

ML Mini-Batch Gradient Descent with Python Last Updated : 02 Aug, 2022 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report In machine learning, gradient descent is an optimization technique used for computing the model parameters coefficients and bias for algorithms like linear regression, logistic regression, neural networks, etc. In this technique, we repeatedly iterate through the training set and update the model parameters in accordance with the gradient of the error with respect to the training set. Depending on the number of training examples considered in updating the model parameters, we have 3-types of gradient descents: Batch Gradient Descent: Parameters are updated after computing the gradient of the error with respect to the entire training set Stochastic Gradient Descent: Parameters are updated after computing the gradient of the error with respect to a single training example Mini-Batch Gradient Descent: Parameters are updated after computing the gradient of the error with respect to a subset of the training set Batch Gradient Descent Stochastic Gradient Descent Mini-Batch Gradient Descent Since the entire training data is considered before taking a step in the direction of gradient, therefore it takes a lot of time for making a single update. Since only a single training example is considered before taking a step in the direction of gradient, we are forced to loop over the training set and thus cannot exploit the speed associated with vectorizing the code. Since a subset of training examples is considered, it can make quick updates in the model parameters and can also exploit the speed associated with vectorizing the code. It makes smooth updates in the model parameters It makes very noisy updates in the parameters Depending upon the batch size, the updates can be made less noisy greater the batch size less noisy is the update Thus, mini-batch gradient descent makes a compromise between the speedy convergence and the noise associated with gradient update which makes it a more flexible and robust algorithm. Convergence in BGD, SGD MBGD Mini-Batch Gradient Descent: Algorithm- Let theta model parameters and max_iters number of epochs. for itr 1, 2, 3, , max_iters: for mini_batch X_mini, y_mini: Forward Pass on the batch X_mini: Make predictions on the mini-batch Compute error in predictions Jtheta with the current values of the parameters Backward Pass: Compute gradienttheta partial derivative of Jtheta w.r.t. theta Update parameters: theta theta learning_rategradienttheta Below is the Python Implementation: Step 1: First step

mini_batch X_mini, y_mini: Forward Pass on the batch X_mini: Make predictions on the mini-batch Compute error in predictions Jtheta with the current values of the parameters Backward Pass: Compute gradienttheta partial derivative of Jtheta w.r.t. theta Update parameters: theta theta learning_rategradienttheta Below is the Python Implementation: Step 1: First step is to import dependencies, generate data for linear regression, and visualize the generated data. We have generated 8000 data examples, each having 2 attributesfeatures. These data examples are further divided into training sets X_train, y_train and testing set X_test, y_test having 7200 and 800 examples respectively. Python3 importing dependencies import numpy as np import matplotlib.pyplot as plt creating data mean np.array 5.0 , 6.0 cov np.array 1.0 , 0.95 , 0.95 , 1.2 data np.random.multivariate_normalmean, cov, 8000 visualising data plt.scatterdata: 500 , 0 , data: 500 , 1 , marker '.' plt.show train-test-split data np.hstacknp.onesdata.shape 0 , 1 , data split_factor 0.90 split int split_factor data.shape 0 X_train data:split, : - 1 y_train data:split, - 1 .reshape - 1 , 1 X_test datasplit:, : - 1 y_test datasplit:, - 1 .reshape - 1 , 1 print quot Number of examples in training set d quot X_train.shape 0 print quot Number of examples in testing set d quot X_test.shape 0 Output: Number of examples in training set 7200 Number of examples in testing set 800 Step 2: Next, we write the code for implementing linear regression using mini-batch gradient descent. gradientDescent is the main driver function and other functions are helper functions used for making predictions hypothesis, computing gradients gradient, computing error cost and creating mini-batches create_mini_batches. The driver function initializes the parameters, computes the best set of parameters for the model, and returns these parameters along with a list containing a history of errors as the parameters get updated. Example Python3 linear regression using "mini-batch" gradient descent function to compute hypothesis predictions def hypothesisX, theta: return np.dotX, theta function to compute gradient of error function w.r.t. theta def gradientX, y, theta: h hypothesisX, theta grad np.dotX.transpose, h - y return grad function to compute the error for current values of theta def costX, y, theta: h hypothesisX, theta J np.doth - y.transpose, h - y J 2 return J 0 function to create a list containing mini-batches def create_mini_batchesX, y, batch_size: mini_batches data np.hstackX, y np.random.shuffledata n_minibatches data.shape 0 batch_size i 0 for i in range n_minibatches 1 : mini_batch

theta def costX, y, theta: h hypothesisX, theta J np.doth - y.transpose, h - y J 2 return J 0 function to create a list containing mini-batches def create_mini_batchesX, y, batch_size: mini_batches data np.hstackX, y np.random.shuffledata n_minibatches data.shape 0 batch_size i 0 for i in range n_minibatches 1 : mini_batch datai batch_size:i 1 batch_size, : X_mini mini_batch:, : - 1 Y_mini mini_batch:, - 1 .reshape - 1 , 1 mini_batches.appendX_mini, Y_mini if data.shape 0 batch_size ! 0 : mini_batch datai batch_size:data.shape 0 X_mini mini_batch:, : - 1 Y_mini mini_batch:, - 1 .reshape - 1 , 1 mini_batches.appendX_mini, Y_mini return mini_batches function to perform mini-batch gradient descent def gradientDescentX, y, learning_rate 0.001 , batch_size 32 : theta np.zerosX.shape 1 , 1 error_list max_iters 3 for itr in range max_iters: mini_batches create_mini_batchesX, y, batch_size for mini_batch in mini_batches: X_mini, y_mini mini_batch theta theta - learning_rate gradientX_mini, y_mini, theta error_list.appendcostX_mini, y_mini, theta return theta, error_list Calling the gradientDescent function to compute the model parameters theta and visualize the change in the error function. Python3 theta, error_list gradientDescentX_train, y_train print "Bias ", theta 0 print "Coefficients ", theta 1 : visualising gradient descent plt.ploterror_list plt.xlabel"Number of iterations" plt.ylabel"Cost" plt.show Output: Bias 0.81830471 Coefficients 1.04586595 Step 3: Finally, we make predictions on the testing set and compute the mean absolute error in predictions. Python3 predicting output for X_test y_pred hypothesisX_test, theta plt.scatterX_test:, 1 , y_test:, , marker '.' plt.plotX_test:, 1 , y_pred, color 'orange' plt.show calculating error in predictions error np. sum np. abs y_test - y_pred y_test.shape 0 print quot Mean absolute error quot , error Output: Mean absolute error 0.4366644295854125 The orange line represents the final hypothesis function: theta0 theta1X_test:, 1 theta2X_test:, 2 0 Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article ML Momentum-based Gradient Optimizer savyakhosla Follow Improve Article Tags : Computer Subject Machine Learning Practice Tags : Machine Learning

Semi Supervised Classification in Data Mining Last Updated : 08 Aug, 2022 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report A classification between supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms is a type of machine learning called semi-supervised learning. At the time of training, it uses both labeled and unlabeled datasets. It acts on data that, while having some labels, is primarily unlabeled. Working: Semi-supervised learning trains the model using pseudo-labeled training data as opposed to supervised learning. During training, many other models like neural network models and training methods are introduced to increase accuracy. Step 1: First, it uses a very small portion of labeled training data to train the model using supervised learning algorithms. Up until the model produces accurate results, training is continued. Step 2: Now algorithm will use a portion of unlabeled training data with pseudo labels. In this step, the output can have less accuracy. Step 3: In this step labeled training data and pseudo-labeled training data are linked. Step 4: Unlabeled training data and labeled training data share the same input data. Step 5: As we did in the previous phase, train the model once more using the new combined input. It will decrease the number of errors and increase the models accuracy. Advantages: It is simple to comprehend. It minimizes the utilization of annotated data. This algorithm is reliable. Disadvantages: The outcomes of iterations are unstable. Data at the network level is not covered by it. It is not very accurate. Application of Semi-Supervised Learning: 1. Speech recognition: Because labeling audio requires a lot of time and resources, semi-supervised learning can be utilized to overcome these obstacles and deliver superior results. 2. Web content classification: To classify information on web pages by assigning relevant labels would require a massive staff of human capital due to the billions of websites that exist and offer all kinds of material. To enhance user experience, many forms of semi-supervised learning are employed to annotate and categorize web material. 3. Text document classification: Making a text document classifier is another case where semi-supervised learning has been effective. The technique works well in this case since it is quite challenging for human annotators to read through several texts that are wordy in order to assign a simple label, such as a kind or genre. Example: A text document classifier is a typical illustration of a semi-supervised learning application. In this kind

Create a Testimonial box switcher using HTML CSS JavaScript Last Updated : 23 Jul, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report In this article, we will develop an interactive Testimonial box switcher application using HTML CSS JavaScript Language. In this application, we have a Card component that has the message given by the testimonial, also there is information about the person and hisher designation. The card component displays the new testimonial message when the custom buttons to switch between the message boxes are clicked. Preview of final output : Let us have a look at how the final output will look like. Prerequisites: HTML CSS JavaScript Approach: Create a HTML strcuture by usng the HTML tags. We have used h1 to represent the GeeksforGeeks heading and h3 for the Application Name. We have created the testimonal conatiner by using the class. There is external styling file which contains all the styling code for each compoenent of the application. The colurs, efffects, padding, heght width all these is been defined and manage in the styling code file. In the JavaScript code, we have defined the data of the testiomanl messages. This includes image, name, message and the designation of the perforn. Then we are stroing the referece of HTML testimonal-cont element to display the message and information there. In the disTestimonial function, we are rendering the testimonal messahe along with the other information. Example: Below is the implementation of the above above HTML Testimonial Box Switcher Using HTML CSS JavaScript GeeksforGeeks Testimonial Box Switcher using HTML CSS JavaScript CSS import url 'https:fonts.googleapis.comcss2?familyDancingScript:wght400;700displayswap' ; padding : 0 ; margin : 0 ; box-sizing : border-box ; font-family : 'Poppins' , sans-serif ; body background : ffffff ; color : 000000 ; . container background : linear-gradient to right , ffd98e , 77efff ; width : 100 vw ; position : absolute ; transform : translate -50 , -50 ; top : 50 ; left : 50 ; max-width : 40 em ; min-height : 35 em ; border-radius : 0.5 em ; display : flex ; flex-direction : column ; justify-content : center ; align-items : center ; box-shadow : 0 0 20 px rgba 0 , 0 , 0 , 0.3 ; . title font-size : 3 em ; margin : 10 px 0 ; text-align : center ; color : green ; text-shadow : 2 px 2 px

justify-content : center ; align-items : center ; box-shadow : 0 0 20 px rgba 0 , 0 , 0 , 0.3 ; . title font-size : 3 em ; margin : 10 px 0 ; text-align : center ; color : green ; text-shadow : 2 px 2 px 4 px rgba 0 , 0 , 0 , 0.3 ; . switcher font-size : 1.5 em ; margin : 10 px 0 ; text-align : center ; color : 000000 ; . testimonial-container width : 100 ; max-width : 80 ; height : auto ; position : relative ; margin : auto ; padding : 2 em 1.5 em ; border : 1 px solid f8f8f8 ; border-radius : 0.5 em ; background : rgba 219 , 162 , 221 , 0.849 ; backdrop-filter : blur 5 px ; transition : transform 0.3 s ease-in-out ; overflow : hidden ; text-align : center ; box-shadow : 0 0 10 px rgba 0 , 0 , 0 , 0.2 ; . container : hover . testimonial-container transform : scale 1.05 ; . container button font-size : 1.7 em ; height : 2.1 em ; width : 2.1 em ; background : fff ; position : absolute ; color : 000000 ; box-shadow : 0 0 1 em rgba 1 , 17 , 39 , 0.25 ; border-radius : 50 ; cursor : pointer ; margin : auto ; top : 0 ; bottom : 0 ; border : none ; transition : background-color 0.3 s ease-in-out ; z-index : 1 ; . container button : hover background-color : ffffff ; color : 000000 ; . testimonial-container h3 font-size : 1.4 em ; text-align : center ; margin-bottom : 0.5 em ; color : 001aff ; . testimonial-container h6 font-size : 1 em ; letter-spacing : 0.05 em ; font-weight : 400 ; text-align : center ; color : ff0d0d ; . testimonial-container p font-size : 1 em ; line-height : 1.5 ; letter-spacing : 0.05 em ; text-align : center ; color : 000000 ; . testimonial-container img display : block ; margin : 1.8 em auto 1.25 em auto ; border-radius : 50 ; object-fit : cover ; width : 4.4 em ; height : 4.4 em ; button prev left : -1.1 em ; button next right : -1.1 em ; button prev : hover background-color : 000000

block ; margin : 1.8 em auto 1.25 em auto ; border-radius : 50 ; object-fit : cover ; width : 4.4 em ; height : 4.4 em ; button prev left : -1.1 em ; button next right : -1.1 em ; button prev : hover background-color : 000000 ; color : white ; button next : hover background-color : 000000 ; color : white ; media screen and max-width : 650px . container font-size : 14 px ; min-height : 30 em ; . testimonial-container min-height : auto ; JavaScript let data img : "https:media.geeksforgeeks.orgwp-contentuploads20230816191453gfglogo.png" , name : "Rahul" , role : "Web Developer" , msg : GeeksforGeeks is an incredible platform that has helped me enhance my web development skills. The tutorials and articles provided here are a valuable resource for anyone in the field. , , img : "https:media.geeksforgeeks.orgwp-contentuploads20230816191453gfglogo.png" , name : "Priya" , role : "Data Scientist" , msg : I'm grateful for GeeksforGeeks, which has been my go-to platform for learning and staying updated with the latest developments in data science. The quality of content here is unmatched. , , img : "https:media.geeksforgeeks.orgwp-contentuploads20230816191453gfglogo.png" , name : "Amit" , role : "Machine Learning Engineer" , msg : As a machine learning engineer, GeeksforGeeks has been instrumental in my career growth. The comprehensive tutorials and practical examples have been a game-changer for me. , , ; let i 0 ; let j data . length ; let testCont document . getElementById "testimonial-cont" ; let prev document . getElementById "prev" ; let next document . getElementById "next" ; let disTestimonial testCont . innerHTML data i . msg data i . name data i . role ; ; prev . addEventListener "click" , i j i - 1 j ; disTestimonial ; ; next . addEventListener "click" , i j i 1 j ; disTestimonial ; ; window . onload disTestimonial ; ; Output: Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Build a Text to Speech Converter using HTML, CSS Javascript G gauravgandal Follow Improve Article Tags : Web Technologies Geeks Premier League JavaScript-Projects Geeks Premier League 2023

Understanding One-Class Support Vector Machines Last Updated : 24 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Support Vector Machine is a popular supervised machine learning algorithm. it is used for both classifications and regression. In this article, we will discuss One-Class Support Vector Machines model. One-Class Support Vector Machines One-Class Support Vector Machine is a special variant of Support Vector Machine that is primarily designed for outlier, anomaly, or novelty detection. The objective behind using one-class SVM is to identify instances that deviate significantly from the norm. Unlike other traditional Machine Learning models, one-class SVM is not used to perform binary or multiclass classification tasks but to detect outliers or novelties within the dataset. Some of the key working principles of one-class SVM is discussed below. Outlier Boundary : One-Class SVM operates by defining a boundary around the majority class normal instances in the feature space. This boundary is constructed to encapsulate the normal data points, effectively creating a region of normalcy. Margin Maximization : This algorithm strives to maximize the margin around the normal instances, allowing for a more robust separation between normal and anomalous data points. This margin is crucial for accurately identifying outliers during testing. High sensitivity: One-Class SVM has an in-build hyperparameter called "nu," representing an upper bound on the fraction of margin errors and support vectors. Fine-tuning this parameter influences the model's sensitivity to outliers. How does One-Class SVM differ from SVM? SVM and one-class SVMs are like twins but not identical twins, as their usage and principals are different. The three most common differences are discussed below: Aspects Support Vector Machine One-Class Support Vector Machine Single-Class Training Requires labeled data from both classes for training Operates with only the majority class during training Imbalance Handling Can't handle imbalance nature of datasets. Inherently addresses class imbalance, prevalent in outlier detection tasks. By concentrating on the majority class during training. Outlier Detection Focus Only aims to find a hyperplane that best separates multiple classes. Excels in scenarios where the goal is to uncover instances that deviate from the norm like in fraud detection or fault monitoring. How One-Class SVM Works? One-Class Support Vector Machines OCSVM operate on a fascinating principle inspired by the idea of isolating the norm from the abnormal in a dataset. Unlike traditional Support Vector Machines SVM, which are adept at handling binary and multiclass classification problems, OCSVM specializes in

or fault monitoring. How One-Class SVM Works? One-Class Support Vector Machines OCSVM operate on a fascinating principle inspired by the idea of isolating the norm from the abnormal in a dataset. Unlike traditional Support Vector Machines SVM, which are adept at handling binary and multiclass classification problems, OCSVM specializes in the nuanced task of anomaly detection. The workflow of OCSVM is discussed below: Conceptual Foundation: OCSVM establishes itself on the premise that the majority of real-world data is inherently normal. In most scenarios, outliers or anomalies are rare occurrences that deviate significantly from the usual patterns. OCSVM's goal is to define a boundary encapsulating the normal instances in the feature space, thereby creating a region of familiarity. Outlier Boundary Definition: The algorithm crafts a boundary around the normal instances, often referred to as the "normalcy region." This boundary is strategically positioned to maximize the margin around the normal data points, allowing for a clear delineation between what is considered ordinary and what may be deemed unusual. Think of it as drawing a protective circle around the typical instances to shield them from the outliers or anomalies. Margin Maximization: The heart of OCSVM lies in its commitment to maximizing the margin between the normal instances and the boundary. A larger margin provides a robust separation, enhancing the model's ability to discern anomalies during testing. This emphasis on margin maximization is akin to creating a safety buffer around the normal instances, fortifying the model against the influence of potential outliers or anomalies. Training Process: During the training phase, OCSVM exclusively leverages the majority class or normal instances. This unimodal focus distinguishes it from traditional SVMs, which necessitate examples from both classes for effective training. By concentrating solely on the norm, OCSVM tailors itself to scenarios where anomalies are sparse, and labeled instances of anomalies are hard to come by. It comes with a fantastic hyperparameter called 'nu' . This parameter acts as an upper bound on the fraction of margin errors and support vectors allowed by the model. Tuning the nu parameter enables practitioners to strike a balance between the desire for a stringent model that minimizes false positives normal instances misclassified as anomalies and a more lenient model that embraces a higher fraction of anomalies. T esting and Anomaly Identification: Armed with the learned normalcy region, OCSVM can swiftly identify anomalies during testing. Instances falling outside the defined boundary are flagged

a stringent model that minimizes false positives normal instances misclassified as anomalies and a more lenient model that embraces a higher fraction of anomalies. T esting and Anomaly Identification: Armed with the learned normalcy region, OCSVM can swiftly identify anomalies during testing. Instances falling outside the defined boundary are flagged as potential outliers. The model essentially acts as a vigilant guardian, scrutinizing new data points and signaling if they exhibit behavior significantly different from the norm. One-Class SVM in Anomaly Detection In the domain of anomaly detection , One-Class Support Vector Machines OCSVM serve as a robust and versatile tool designed to discern normal patterns from irregular occurrences. Notably, OCSVM takes a distinctive approach by training exclusively on the majority class, which represents normal instances, eliminating the need for labeled anomalous data during training. This is particularly advantageous in real-world scenarios where anomalies are rare, making it challenging to obtain sufficient labeled samples. The core principle of OCSVM involves defining a boundary around the normal instances in the feature space, achieved through a specified kernel function and a nuanced parameter termed "nu." This parameter acts as an upper limit on the fraction of margin errors and support vectors, enabling users to fine-tune the model's sensitivity to outliers. During the testing phase, instances falling outside this learned boundary are flagged as potential outliers, facilitating efficient anomaly identification. OCSVM's adaptability extends to various applications, including fraud detection in financial transactions, fault monitoring in industrial systems, and network intrusion detection. Its innate ability to capture complex, non-linear relationships and its focus on the majority class make it a valuable asset in safeguarding systems against unexpected events and ensuring robust anomaly detection across diverse domains. In this article, we will implement credit card anomaly detect using OCSVM further. Use Cases of One-Class SVM There are several real-world use-cases of One-Class SVM which are listed below-- Detecting fraud in financial transactions: OCSVM excels in rare cases that are not uncommon associated with fraudulent activity in financial transactions. With specialized training in general practices, it becomes adept at distinguishing specific patterns. During testing, deviations from these scholarly models are immediately flagged, indicating that the fraud can be treated as abnormalities. Fault detection in commercial systems: Companies that rely on complex devices can benefit from OCSVMs real-time monitoring of defects or anomalies. When applied to sensor data, OCSVM identifies abnormal behavior, and identifies potential errors. Early detection

scholarly models are immediately flagged, indicating that the fraud can be treated as abnormalities. Fault detection in commercial systems: Companies that rely on complex devices can benefit from OCSVMs real-time monitoring of defects or anomalies. When applied to sensor data, OCSVM identifies abnormal behavior, and identifies potential errors. Early detection through OCSVM prevents maintenance, reduces downtime and increases operational efficiency. Network Intrusion Detection: OCSVM can play an important role in continuously monitoring computer networks to protect against malicious activity. It helps identify unusual network behaviors that may indicate a possible attack. OCSVM works well in situations where most network traffic is normal and anomalies are very rare. Quality Control in Manufacturing: Strict quality control is needed in manufacturing to ensure fault-free products. OCSVM is applied on sensor data or product characteristics to detect deviations from the perfect product. It helps to detect defects early during production. One-Class SVM Kernel Trick One-Class SVM supports various kernel options like SVM for optimized performance which are discussed below: Linear Kernel: The linear kernel is the simplest form of a kernel and is equivalent to performing a linear transformation. It is suitable when the relationship between the features is approximately linear. The decision boundary in the higher-dimensional space is a hyperplane. Polynomial Kernel: The polynomial kernel introduces non-linearity by considering not just the dot product but also higher-order interactions between features. It is characterized by a user-defined degree parameter degree . A higher degree allows the model to capture more complex relationships but in the same time it may increase the risk of overfitting. Sigmoid Kernel: The sigmoid kernel is particularly suitable for scenarios where the data distribution is not well defined or exhibits sigmoidal patterns. It is often used in neural network-inspired SVMs. The gamma and coef0 parameters govern the shape and position of the decision boundary. Radial Basis Function RBF or Gaussian Kernel: The RBF kernel is versatile for handling complex, non-linear relationships. It transforms data into a space where intricate decision boundaries can be drawn. Well-suited when the exact form of relationships is unknown or intricate. Precomputed Kernel : This kernel allows users to provide a precomputed kernel matrix instead of the actual data. Useful when the kernel matrix is computed using a custom kernel function or when using pairwise similarities between instances. From these above kernels the RBF kernel is the default kernel for One-Class SVM. In our implementation we

allows users to provide a precomputed kernel matrix instead of the actual data. Useful when the kernel matrix is computed using a custom kernel function or when using pairwise similarities between instances. From these above kernels the RBF kernel is the default kernel for One-Class SVM. In our implementation we will use default kernel for credit card anomaly detection. Step-by-Step implementation of One-Class Support Vector Machines in Python Importing required modules At first, we will import all required Python libraries like Pandas , NumPy , Matplotlib and SKlearn etc. Python3 Import necessary libraries import pandas as pd import numpy as np import matplotlib.pyplot as plt from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split from sklearn.svm import OneClassSVM from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler Dataset loading and preprocessing Now we will load the famous credit card dataset . For faster implementation we will use first 50k rows of the dataset. Then we will use Standard Scaler to scale the target column. Then we will separate the features and target variable for further usages. Python3 credit_data pd . read_csv 'creditcard.csv' , nrows 50000 https:www.kaggle.commlg-ulbcreditcardfraud standardized_data_without_class StandardScaler . fit_transform credit_data . loc :, credit_data . columns ! 'Class' data_50k_new standardized_data_without_class 0 : 50000 data_50k_df pd . DataFrame data data_50k_new Separate features and target variable X credit_data . drop columns 'Class' y credit_data 'Class' Model training Now we will train the One-class SVM on various hyperparameters which are discussed below: kernel : The choice of the kernel determines the transformation applied to the input data in a higher-dimensional space. Here we have set to default "rbf" which stands for Radial Basis Function, commonly known as the Gaussian kernel. This kernel is suitable for capturing complex, non-linear relationships in the data. degree : We have set it to default value 3. It defines the degree of the polynomial function and is particularly applicable when the kernel is set to "poly." However, if the patterns of dataset act as polynomial then this parameter automatically handles the kernel as required. gamma : is a crucial parameter that influences the shape of the decision boundary. A smaller gamma value results in a broader decision boundary which makes the model less sensitive to individual data points. Conversely, a larger gamma value leads to a more complex decision boundary, potentially capturing intricate patterns in the data. Fine-tuning gamma is essential for achieving optimal model performance. nu : It represents an upper bound

NumPy Vector Multiplication Last Updated : 10 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report NumPy is a Python library used for performing numerical computations. It provides an efficient way to work with vectors and matrices especially when performing vector multiplication operations . It is used in various applications such as data science, machine learning, physics simulations and many more. In this article, well focus on three major types of vector multiplication 1. Scalar Product Scalar multiplication refers to the operation where a scalar a single number is multiplied by each element of a vector. This operation is common in many applications like scaling vectors or adjusting data points in machine learning. In NumPy scalar multiplication is straightforward, you can simply multiply a scalar value with a vector and each element of the vector gets multiplied by the scalar. Given vector v is given as Tex 4,1Tex where it has two components: Tex 4 Tex and Tex 1Tex . When we multiply a vector by a scalar i.e a constant number lets say 5, we multiply each component of the vector by that scalar. In this case scalar is Tex5Tex . So we multiply the vector v by 5: Tex54,154,5120,5Tex Thus, the resulting vector after scalar multiplication is Tex20,5Tex . Scalar Multiplication in Python We will be using NumPy and math . Here w becomes Tex20, 5 Tex after multiplication by 5. Python import numpy as np import math v np . array 4 , 1 w 5 v print "w " , w Output: w 20 5 2. Dot Product Dot product is also known as the inner product of two vectors is a scalar value obtained by multiplying corresponding elements of the vectors and summing them up. It is a key operation in machine learning, particularly in measuring similarity between vectors or computing projections . To compute the dot product in NumPy you can use np.dot. 1. Given Vectors: Texmathbfa left a_x, a_y, a_z right Tex Texmathbfb left b_x, b_y, b_z right Tex These are three-dimensional vectors, where each component represents the vectors magnitude along the x, y and z axes, respectively. 2. Dot Product Formula: Dot product of two vectors a and b is calculated as: Texmathbfa cdot mathbfb left mathbfa right left mathbfb right cos thetaTex Where: Texleft mathbfa right Tex and Texleft mathbfb right Tex are the magnitudes of vectors a and b

x, y and z axes, respectively. 2. Dot Product Formula: Dot product of two vectors a and b is calculated as: Texmathbfa cdot mathbfb left mathbfa right left mathbfb right cos thetaTex Where: Texleft mathbfa right Tex and Texleft mathbfb right Tex are the magnitudes of vectors a and b , respectively. TexthetaTex is the angle between the two vectors. Formula is equivalent to the following component-wise expression: Texmathbfa cdot mathbfb a_x b_x a_y b_y a_z b_zTex This means that dot product is the sum of the products of corresponding components of the two vectors and result of the dot product is a scalar quantity. Dot Product Multiplication in Python v Tex 2,12,1Tex and s Tex3,23,2Tex is calculated as: Texmathbfv cdot mathbfs 2 times 3 1 times -2 6 2 4Tex Python import numpy as np import math v np . array 2 , 1 s np . array 3 , - 2 d np . dot v , s print d d_alt v s print d_alt Output: 4 4 3. Cross Product Cross product is a vector operation that returns a new vector perpendicular to both of the input vectors and is only applicable in 3D space . It is essential in fields such as physics, computer graphics and robotics especially when working with 3D rotations or torque calculations. Cross product is computed using np.cross in NumPy and result is a vector that is orthogonal to both input vectors. 1. Given Vectors: Texmathbfa left a_x, a_y, a_z right Tex Texmathbfb left b_x, b_y, b_z right Tex These are three-dimensional vectors where a and b represent the components along the x, y and z axes. 2. Cross Product Formula: Texmathbfa times mathbfb mathbfa mathbfb sin thetaTex Where: Texmathbfa Tex and Texmathbfb Tex are the magnitudes lengths of the vectors. TexthetaTex is the angle between the two vectors. Result of the cross product is a vector that is perpendicular to both a and b and the magnitude of this vector is proportional to the area of the parallelogram formed by a and b . 3. Determinant Approach for Cross Product: Cross product can also be computed using the determinant of a matrix. Texmathbfa times mathbfb beginvmatrixmathbfi mathbfj mathbfk a_x a_y a_z b_x b_y b_zendvmatrixTex Where: Texmathbfi, mathbfj, mathbfk Tex are the unit vectors in the x, y and z directions, respectively. Matrix involves the components of a and b . Cross

product can also be computed using the determinant of a matrix. Texmathbfa times mathbfb beginvmatrixmathbfi mathbfj mathbfk a_x a_y a_z b_x b_y b_zendvmatrixTex Where: Texmathbfi, mathbfj, mathbfk Tex are the unit vectors in the x, y and z directions, respectively. Matrix involves the components of a and b . Cross Product in Python Cross product of v Texbeginbmatrix 4 9 12 endbmatrixTex and s Texbeginbmatrix 21 32 44 endbmatrixTex is calculated as: Texmathbfv times mathbfs beginvmatrixmathbfi mathbfj mathbfk 4 9 12 21 32 44endvmatrixTex Result is a vector r , which is perpendicular to both v and s . Python import numpy as np import math v np . array 4 , 9 , 12 s np . array 21 , 32 , 44 r np . cross v , s print r Output: 12 76 -61 By mastering vector multiplication techniques like scalar multiplication, dot product and cross product with NumPy you can solve complex problems in data science, machine learning, physics and engineering. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article How to calculate dot product of two vectors in Python? R riasehgal1999 Follow Improve Article Tags : Machine Learning python Python-numpy Practice Tags : Machine Learning python

Biology Last Updated : 22 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Biology is the scientific study of life and living organisms. As a natural science, it covers a vast range of topics, yet unifying themes connect its diverse aspects into a cohesive field. Biology explores all forms of life, from microscopic bacteria to the largest whales, and examines how these organisms interact with one another and their environments. This field includes Anatomy, Physiology, Ecology, and Morphology of living organisms. The definition of biology includes the relationship between plants, animals, microorganisms, and their relation to the environment. Table of Content Major Branches of Biology Divisions of Biology History of Biology Prehistoric Beginnings: Ancient Civilizations and Early Naturalists: The Middle Ages and Islamic Golden Age: Renaissance and Early Modern Biology: The Age of Enlightenment and the Birth of Modern Biology: The 20th Century and the Molecular Revolution: Basic Concepts of Biology 1. Cell Theory 2. Heredity and Genetics 3. Evolution 4. Homeostasis 5. Metabolism 6. Energy Transfer 7. Unity and Diversity of Life 8. Structure and Function 9. Ecology 10. Biodiversity 11. Reproduction 12. Adaptation NCERT Biology Class-wise Revision Notes NCERT Biology Chapter-wise Solutions Important Class 12 Biology Chapters with Class 12 Biology Notes Important Class 11 Biology Chapters with Class 11 Biology Notes Important Class 10 Biology Chapters with Class 10 Biology Notes Important Class 9 Biology Chapters with Class 9 Biology Notes Important Class 8 Biology Chapters with Class 8 Biology Notes School Biology Difference Between Series of Biology Biology Articles on Facts Themes of Biology Importance of Biology How biology is used in the real world? Scope of Biology in Future What is Biology? "The more I learn about biology, the more I realize how incredibly beautiful life is." - E.O. Wilson The term "Biology" in Greek is divided into two parts - bios life ; logos study, which translates into study of life. Biology is a part of Science, along with Physics and Chemistry . These days Biology is commonly referred to as "Life Sciences" . Biology is the story of lifes unfolding on Earth. It is the branch of science that studies living organisms and their processes. Historically, biology focused primarily on understanding the human body and its functions, laying the foundation for medicine. Over time, it expanded to explore fundamental questions about the origin of life, the growth of biodiversity, and the

Earth. It is the branch of science that studies living organisms and their processes. Historically, biology focused primarily on understanding the human body and its functions, laying the foundation for medicine. Over time, it expanded to explore fundamental questions about the origin of life, the growth of biodiversity, and the evolution of species in response to their environments. These mysteries have long fascinated biologists. Major Branches of Biology Biology is a vast field, and many different branches of biology focus on specific aspects of life. Some of the major branches of biology include: Biochemistry: The study of the chemical processes that occur in living organisms. Molecular biology: The study of the molecules that make up living organisms, such as DNA, RNA, and proteins. Cell biology: The study of the structure and function of cells. Genetics: The study of heredity and how traits are passed down from parents to offspring. Microbiology: The study of microorganisms, such as bacteria and viruses. Botany: The study of plants. Zoology: The study of animals. Physiology: The study of the functions of living organisms. Ecology: The study of interactions between organisms and their environment. Evolutionary biology: The study of how species change over time. The Science of Life The study of biology is essential to understanding the natural world around us. Biology helps to understand the diversity of life, the processes by which living organisms function, and the relationships between different organisms. This knowledge is essential for solving many of the world's most pressing problems, such as climate change, disease, and food security . Divisions of Biology The subject of biology has many divisions which are discussed below: Topic Link Short Statement Anatomy Visit Site Anatomy is the branch of biology concerned with the study of the structure of organisms and their parts. Biotechnology Visit Site Biotechnology involves the manipulation of living organisms or their systems to develop or make products, enhancing human life and health. Botany Visit Site Botany is the scientific study of plants, including their physiology, structure, genetics, ecology, distribution, and classification. Ecology Visit Site Ecology examines the interactions among organisms and their biophysical environment, which can be natural or built, and how these interactions affect the distribution and abundance of organisms. Genetics Visit Site Genetics is the study of genes, genetic variation, and heredity in living organisms, explaining how traits are passed from parents to offspring. Immunology Visit Site Immunology is the

biophysical environment, which can be natural or built, and how these interactions affect the distribution and abundance of organisms. Genetics Visit Site Genetics is the study of genes, genetic variation, and heredity in living organisms, explaining how traits are passed from parents to offspring. Immunology Visit Site Immunology is the study of the immune system, the body's defense against infectious organisms and other invaders. Microbiology Visit Site Microbiology is the study of microscopic organisms, such as bacteria, viruses, archaea, fungi, and protozoa, focusing on their interactions with humans and other organisms. Physiology Visit Site Physiology explores how organisms, organ systems, organs, cells, and biomolecules carry out the chemical and physical functions in a living system. Zoology Visit Site Zoology is the scientific study of the behavior, structure, physiology, classification, and distribution of animals. History of Biology The history of biology is a journey of discovery that spans thousands of years, from the earliest human observations of life to modern scientific breakthroughs. Heres a detailed look at how biology has evolved over time: Prehistoric Beginnings: In prehistoric times, early humans lived in caves and forests, depending on their environment for survival. They observed plants and animals for food, shelter, and medicinal purposes. Although not formalized, this practical knowledge laid the groundwork for what would later become the science of biology. Evidence of early human interest in the natural world can be found in cave paintings and artifacts that depict animals and plant life. Ancient Civilizations and Early Naturalists: The first organized study of biology emerged in ancient civilizations like Egypt, Mesopotamia, and India. However, it was the Greeks who truly began to systematize the study of living organisms. Aristotle 384322 B.C.: Known as the "Father of Biology," Aristotle was the first to classify animals based on their characteristics, behaviors, and habitats. He observed the anatomy and physiology of various animals, dissecting them to understand their structures. Aristotles work on biology influenced Western thought for centuries. Theophrastus 371287 B.C.: A student of Aristotle, Theophrastus is known as the "Father of Botany." He classified plants into groups based on their structures and uses, providing one of the first comprehensive studies of plant life. His works on plant physiology, reproduction , and classification were foundational for later botanical studies. Hippocrates 460370 B.C.: Often referred to as the "Father of Medicine," Hippocrates sought to explain disease and human health through natural causes rather than superstition.

providing one of the first comprehensive studies of plant life. His works on plant physiology, reproduction , and classification were foundational for later botanical studies. Hippocrates 460370 B.C.: Often referred to as the "Father of Medicine," Hippocrates sought to explain disease and human health through natural causes rather than superstition. His theories on disease and the bodys balance of humors influenced medical practice for centuries. The Middle Ages and Islamic Golden Age: During the Middle Ages, scientific progress in Europe slowed, but the Islamic world continued to make important contributions to biology and medicine. Scholars such as Ibn Sina Avicenna and Al-Razi built on the work of Greek scientists, advancing medical knowledge and expanding the study of anatomy, surgery, and pharmacology. Ibn Sina 9801037 A.D.: A Persian polymath, Ibn Sinas "Canon of Medicine" became a key reference in medical education for centuries. It included detailed descriptions of diseases, human anatomy, and treatments. Al-Razi 865925 A.D.: Known for his work in medicine and chemistry, Al-Razi was one of the first to distinguish between different types of diseases, such as measles and smallpox. He also pioneered the use of experimental methods in medicine. Renaissance and Early Modern Biology: The Renaissance 14th17th centuries marked a period of great scientific and intellectual growth, spurred by renewed interest in classical knowledge and new scientific discoveries. This era saw the development of more advanced techniques in observation, experimentation, and classification. Andreas Vesalius 15141564: A Belgian anatomist, Vesalius revolutionized the study of human anatomy with his work De humani corporis fabrica . His detailed dissections of human cadavers corrected many misconceptions that had persisted since ancient times, laying the foundation for modern anatomy. William Harvey 15781657: Harveys groundbreaking work on the circulation of blood in the human body challenged ancient ideas and demonstrated that blood circulates through the heart and body in a closed loop, rather than being absorbed by tissues as previously believed. Anton van Leeuwenhoek 16321723: Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, is credited with the discovery of microorganisms using a microscope of his own design. His observations of bacteria , protozoa , and sperm cells marked the dawn of microbiology and opened up an entirely new world of study. The Age of Enlightenment and the Birth of Modern Biology: The 18th and 19th centuries saw the emergence of modern biology, driven by new discoveries in various subfields such as classification, physiology, and evolution. Carl Linnaeus 17071778:

the dawn of microbiology and opened up an entirely new world of study. The Age of Enlightenment and the Birth of Modern Biology: The 18th and 19th centuries saw the emergence of modern biology, driven by new discoveries in various subfields such as classification, physiology, and evolution. Carl Linnaeus 17071778: A Swedish botanist and zoologist, Linnaeus developed the system of binomial nomenclature, which standardized the naming of organisms using two Latin names genus and species. His classification system is still in use today and laid the groundwork for modern taxonomy. Georges Cuvier 17691832: A French naturalist, Cuvier was one of the founders of paleontology . He used fossil evidence to propose that species could go extinct, challenging the belief in the fixity of species and contributing to the development of evolutionary thought. Charles Darwin 18091882: The most influential figure in the history of biology, Darwin developed the theory of natural selection , explaining how species evolve over time through the process of adaptation to their environments. His landmark work, On the Origin of Species 1859, revolutionized our understanding of evolution and solidified biology as a science. The 20th Century and the Molecular Revolution: The 20th century saw tremendous advancements in biology, particularly in genetics, cell biology, and biotechnology. Key discoveries reshaped our understanding of life at the molecular level. Gregor Mendel 18221884: An Austrian monk, Mendel discovered the fundamental laws of inheritance through experiments with pea plants. His work laid the foundation for modern genetics, although it was not fully recognized until the early 20th century. Watson, Crick, and Franklin 1953: The discovery of the structure of DNA by James Watson, Francis Crick, and Rosalind Franklin opened the door to modern molecular biology. The double helix model of DNA provided the key to understanding genetic inheritance, mutations, and gene expression. The Human Genome Project 19902003: This international research effort mapped the entire human genome, identifying all of the approximately 20,00025,000 genes in human DNA. The project has provided critical insights into human biology, disease, and evolution. Contemporary Biology: Today, biology is a rapidly advancing field, with new technologies and discoveries continuously pushing the boundaries of what we know about life. Major areas of research include: Genetics and Genomics: Advances in gene editing technologies, such as CRISPR, are revolutionizing medicine, agriculture, and biotechnology by enabling precise modifications to the genome. Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine: Stem cells have the potential

continuously pushing the boundaries of what we know about life. Major areas of research include: Genetics and Genomics: Advances in gene editing technologies, such as CRISPR, are revolutionizing medicine, agriculture, and biotechnology by enabling precise modifications to the genome. Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine: Stem cells have the potential to regenerate damaged tissues and organs, offering hope for treating conditions like heart disease, spinal cord injury, and neurodegenerative diseases. Synthetic Biology: This emerging field involves designing and constructing new biological parts, devices, and systems, offering the potential for innovative solutions in healthcare, energy, and environmental protection. Biotechnology and Environmental Biology: The application of biological knowledge to develop solutions for environmental sustainability, such as biofuels, bioremediation, and conservation efforts, is becoming increasingly important in addressing global challenges. Basic Concepts of Biology The basic concepts of biology form the foundation for the diversity of life, its functions, and the intricate systems that govern living organisms . These fundamental ideas encompass a range of topics, from the smallest building blocks of life to the complex interactions between organisms and their environments. Here's are some overview of the core concepts: 1. Cell Theory All living organisms are made up of cells. The cell is the basic unit of structure and function in all living organisms. Cells arise from pre-existing cells. 2. Heredity and Genetics Heredity refers to the passing of traits from parents to offspring through genes. DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid carries genetic information that dictates an organism's traits. Genetics is the study of how traits are inherited and the role of genes in biological inheritance. 3. Evolution Evolution is the process by which species change over time through natural selection and genetic variation . Charles Darwin's theory of natural selection explains how organisms with favorable traits are more likely to survive and reproduce. 4. Homeostasis Homeostasis is the ability of an organism to maintain a stable internal environment despite changes in the external environment. This is crucial for the proper functioning of biological systems e.g., body temperature regulation, pH balance. 5. Metabolism Metabolism refers to all the chemical reactions that occur within an organism to maintain life. It includes processes like catabolism breaking down molecules for energy and anabolism building complex molecules. 6. Energy Transfer Life depends on the flow of energy. Photosynthesis in plants converts sunlight into chemical energy, which is used by plants and other organisms. Respiration is the process through

organism to maintain life. It includes processes like catabolism breaking down molecules for energy and anabolism building complex molecules. 6. Energy Transfer Life depends on the flow of energy. Photosynthesis in plants converts sunlight into chemical energy, which is used by plants and other organisms. Respiration is the process through which organisms convert food into usable energy. 7. Unity and Diversity of Life Despite the vast diversity of organisms, all living beings share common characteristics, such as cellular structure and genetic material. At the same time, organisms are incredibly diverse, adapting to different environments and ecological niches. 8. Structure and Function The structure of an organism or its parts is closely related to its function. For example, the wings of birds are structured for flight, while the roots of plants are designed for nutrient and water absorption. 9. Ecology Ecology is the study of interactions between organisms and their environment. It involves understanding ecosystems, food chains, and the relationships between species, as well as how they adapt to their surroundings. 10. Biodiversity Biodiversity refers to the variety and variability of life on Earth, including different species, ecosystems, and genetic diversity within species. It is essential for ecosystem stability and provides humans with resources such as food, medicine, and raw materials. 11. Reproduction Reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are produced. It can be asexual , involving a single parent, or sexual , involving the fusion of male and female gametes. 12. Adaptation Adaptation refers to the evolutionary process by which a species becomes better suited to its environment. It can involve structural, behavioral, or physiological changes that enhance survival and reproduction. NCERT Biology Class-wise Revision Notes Quick notes help students to revise the whole syllabus in minutes. CBSE Revision Notes clearly give you a short overview of the complete chapter as these CBSE chapter-wise key points are prepared in such a manner that each and every concept from the NCERT syllabus is covered in form of CBSE Revision Notes. Following are the links to the revision notes from Grade 8 to Grade 12: CBSE Class 8 Biology Revision Notes CBSE Class 9 Biology Revision Notes CBSE Class 10 Biology Revision Notes CBSE Class 11 Biology Revision Notes CBSE Class 12 Biology Revision Notes NCERT Biology Chapter-wise Solutions Important biology questions for CBSE classes 612 are available here. Our subject matter experts and educators have created the

Biology Revision Notes CBSE Class 9 Biology Revision Notes CBSE Class 10 Biology Revision Notes CBSE Class 11 Biology Revision Notes CBSE Class 12 Biology Revision Notes NCERT Biology Chapter-wise Solutions Important biology questions for CBSE classes 612 are available here. Our subject matter experts and educators have created the questions with consideration for the NCERT curriculum and syllabus. Students can easily do well on their board exams by figuring out the answers to these questions. Following are the links to the chapterwise solutions from Grade 8 to Grade 12: CBSE Class 8 Biology Chapterwise Solution CBSE Class 9 Biology Chapterwise Solution CBSE Class 10 Biology Chapterwise Solution CBSE Class 11 Biology Chapterwise Solution CBSE Class 12 Biology Chapterwise Solution Important Class 12 Biology Chapters with Class 12 Biology Notes The list of important class 12 biology chapters are: Biotechnology and Its Applications Biomolecules Human Physiology Plant Physiology Plasmodium Life Cycle Classification, Life Cycle and Diagram Ecosystem Evolution Molecular Basis of Inheritance Microbes in Human Welfare The Experimental Proof Of DNA Replication Lac Operon Food Preservation Importance, Objectives, and Methods Biogas Production Role of Microbes Competition Interaction Genetic Code and Mutations What Is Parasitism? Definition, Types and Examples Loss of Biodiversity Important Class 11 Biology Chapters with Class 11 Biology Notes The list of important class 11 biology chapters are: Cell the Unit of Life Neural Control and Coordination Structural Organisation in Animals Generation And Conduction Of Nerve Impulse Factors Affecting Enzyme Activity Biomolecules Definition, Structure, Classification, Examples Parts of a Flower and their Functions Kingdom Monera Definition, Classification, Characteristics, Examples Chemical Coordination and Integration Seed Dormancy Respiration In Plants Diploblastic And Triploblastic Organization Cyclic and Non-cyclic Photo-phosphorylation Cardiac Cycle Difference between Angiosperms and Gymnosperms Meiosis Definition, Stages, Function and Purpose Morphology of Flower Definition, Structure, Parts, Examples Prokaryotic Cells Fermentation: Meaning, Process, Types and Importance Structure Of A Dicotyledonous Seed Protein Structure Primary, Secondary, Tertiary, Quaternary What is Nucleus? Body Fluids and Circulation Connective Tissue Definition, Functions, Types, Examples Biological Classification Organ System Important Class 10 Biology Chapters with Class 10 Biology Notes The list of important class 10 biology chapters are: Human Reproductive System Human Nervous System life process control and coordination Hereditary and evolution notes Our environment Brain Anatomy Components of Ecosystem - Biotic and Abiotic Movement Due to Growth in Plants Coordination in Plants Heterotrophic Nutrition Speciation and Evolution Respiration Managing the Garbage we Produce Transportation

biology chapters are: Human Reproductive System Human Nervous System life process control and coordination Hereditary and evolution notes Our environment Brain Anatomy Components of Ecosystem - Biotic and Abiotic Movement Due to Growth in Plants Coordination in Plants Heterotrophic Nutrition Speciation and Evolution Respiration Managing the Garbage we Produce Transportation in Plants Reflex Action Nutrition in Living Organism Hormones In Animals Accumulation of Variation During Reproduction The Fusion of Biology and Electronics How do the Traits and Characters get expressed? Tracing Evolutionary Relationships Nutrition In Human Beings Evolution Means of Transportation In Plants Role of Hormones in Completing the Life History of Insects and Frogs Important Class 9 Biology Chapters with Class 9 Biology Notes The list of important class 9 biology chapters are: Endoplasmic Reticulum Structure, Types And Functions Bryophyta Structure, Classification and Characteristics Lysosomes Definition, Types, Significance, Functions Pteridophyta Definition, Characteristics, Classification, Uses Carbon Cycle Water Cycle Process, Diagram, and its Various Stages What is Manure? Definition, Types, Advantages and Disadvantages Nervous Tissue Definition, Characteristics, Functions, Types Improvement in Food Resources The Fundamental Unit of Life Crop Variety Improvement Mineral Riches in the Soil Phylum Coelenterata Definition, Characteristics, Classification, Examples Gymnosperms Definition, Characteristics, Uses and Examples Structure and Types of Animal Tissues Meristematic Tissues Definition, Features, Types, Role Scientific Name of Human Being Biogeochemical Cycles Ozone Layer Causes, Effects Depletion Important Class 8 Biology Chapters with Class 8 Biology Notes The list of important class 8 biology chapters are: Types of Pollution Food Sources Food from Plants and Animals Deforestation and Its Causes Conservation of Forest and Wildlife Biosphere Reserve Zones and Their Importance Embryo Development Development Process of Fetus Reforestation Agricultural Implements and Tools Basic Practices of Crop Production Cytoplasm and Nucleus Overview, Structure, Functions, Examples Microorganisms: Friend and Foe Crop Production and Management Reaching The Age of Adolescence Animal Husbandry Types and Advantages School Biology Diagram of Animal Cell What is Biome? Environmental Issues and Solutions Animal Cell Evolution Of Humans Food Web Ecological Pyramid Mitosis Lipids Parts of a Flower and their Functions Cell Organelles Food Chains and Food Webs Diagram of Water Cycle List of 206 Bones in Human Body Cell the Unit of Life Chloroplasts Energy Flow of Ecosystem Difference Between Aerobic and Anaerobic Respiration Ethical Issues Related to Genetically Modified Organisms What does Ramachandran Plot tell us? Classification of Animals Ribosomes Cell Kingdom Protista Carbon Cycle Check Here for More Topics: School

of 206 Bones in Human Body Cell the Unit of Life Chloroplasts Energy Flow of Ecosystem Difference Between Aerobic and Anaerobic Respiration Ethical Issues Related to Genetically Modified Organisms What does Ramachandran Plot tell us? Classification of Animals Ribosomes Cell Kingdom Protista Carbon Cycle Check Here for More Topics: School Biology Archives Biology MAQs What does Ramachandran Plot tell us? What is Oogenesis? What are Darwin's four Postulates? What is DNA Fingerprinting? What is Nephron? What is Metabolism? What is Monocot Root? What is Dicot Root? What is Hemoglobin? What is Amoeba? What Stem Cell is and its use? What is Somatic Hybridization? What is Chromatin? What are Secondary Messengers? What is Crossing Over? What are Homologous Structures? Check Here for More Topics: Biology MAQ Biology Diagram's Tap Root Diagram Diagram of Mitochondria Important Biology Diagrams Amoeba Diagram of Mitosis Diagram of Human Brain Diagram of Ear Ascaris lumbricoides Structure and Life Cycle Labelled Diagram of Scoliodon Trophic level Diagram Diagram Of Stomata and its Types Tobacco Mosaic Virus TMV Diagram of Water Cycle Labelled Diagram of Neuron with Detailed Explanations Diagram of Animal Cell Check Here for More Topics : Important Biology Diagrams for Class 8 to Class 12 and NEET Exam Difference Between Series of Biology The list of articles on difference between are given below: Difference Between Thrombin and Prothrombin Difference Between Aardvarks and Anteaters Difference Between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Replication Difference Between G-Actin and F-Actin Difference Between Alpha, Beta and Gamma Hemolysis Difference Between Purines and Pyrimidines Difference between Pneumothorax and Tension Pneumothorax Difference Between Cold Blooded And Warm-Blooded Animals Difference Between Renewable And Non-Renewable Resources Difference Between Open and Closed Mitosis Difference Between Medial and Lateral Difference Between Autotrophs and Heterotrophs Difference Between Interstitial and Appositional Growth Difference Between Carbohydrates and Lipids Difference Between Oxygenated and Non-oxygenated Gasoline Difference Between Nervous System And Endocrine System Difference Between Active and Passive Transport Biology Articles on Facts Some of the important articles on facts are: Facts About Biogas Facts About Anatomy Interesting Facts About Lungs Facts About Ribosomes Facts About Cholesterol Facts About Evolution Facts about Animal Cell Facts About Vitamins and Minerals Themes of Biology Despite the diversity of life, there are several unifying themes that tie biology together as a single field. These themes include: Hierarchy of organization: Living organisms are organized into a hierarchy, from the smallest molecules to the largest ecosystems. Unity and

Cell Facts About Vitamins and Minerals Themes of Biology Despite the diversity of life, there are several unifying themes that tie biology together as a single field. These themes include: Hierarchy of organization: Living organisms are organized into a hierarchy, from the smallest molecules to the largest ecosystems. Unity and diversity of life: All living organisms share certain characteristics, such as cells, metabolism , homeostasis, growth, reproduction, and adaptation. However, there is also a great deal of diversity among living organisms. Energy and matter flow: Energy and matter flow through living organisms and ecosystems. Change over time: Living organisms and ecosystems change over time. Importance of Biology The study of biology has helped humans advance very far in their field. Few of the examples are given below: Medicine : The basis of contemporary medicine is biology. Scientists have been able to enhance surgical techniques, produce new vaccinations to prevent diseases, and find novel treatments for diseases by knowing how the human body functions. Agriculture : Developing innovative agricultural technology to increase food production and enhance the quality of our food supply requires a strong understanding of biology. Protection of the environment: Understanding and safeguarding the environment depend on biology. Biologists research how organisms interact with their surroundings and create plans to save threatened species and ecosystems. How biology is used in the real world? In the real world the biology is used as in : Medicine: Biologists develop new drugs and vaccines to treat diseases, and they develop new surgical techniques and medical devices. Agriculture: Biologists develop new crop varieties that are resistant to pests and diseases, and they develop new agricultural practices that are more sustainable. Environmental protection: Biologists study the interactions between organisms and their environment, and they develop strategies to protect endangered species and conserve biodiversity. Biotechnology: Biologists use living organisms to produce products, such as food, medicine, and biofuels. Forensic science: Biologists use DNA and other biological evidence to solve crimes. Scope of Biology in Future The future of biology is shaped by rapid advancements in technologies like gene editing, artificial intelligence, and biotechnology, which are revolutionizing medicine, agriculture, and environmental conservation. As we unlock deeper insights into genetics, ecosystems , and disease mechanisms, biology will play a pivotal role in solving global challenges like climate change, food security, and healthcare. Further Reading: Topic Link Short Statement Plant Tissues Visit Site Plant tissues are groups of

NumPy Tutorial Python Library Last Updated : 29 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report NumPy short for Numerical Python is one of the most fundamental libraries in Python for scientific computing. It provides support for large, multi-dimensional arrays and matrices along with a collection of mathematical functions to operate on arrays. At its core it introduces the ndarray n-dimensional array object which allows us to store and manipulate large datasets in a memory-efficient manner. Unlike Pythons built-in lists, NumPy arrays are homogeneous and enable faster operations. Important Facts to Know : Vectorized Operations : NumPy operations are faster than Python lists because they use optimized C-based functions. Broadcasting Feature : NumPy allows operations between arrays of different shapes without explicit looping known as broadcasting making it easier to handle large datasets. What is NumPy Used for? With NumPy, you can perform a wide range of numerical operations, including: Creating and manipulating arrays. Performing element-wise and matrix operations. Generating random numbers and statistical calculations. Conducting linear algebra operations. Working with Fourier transformations. Handling missing values efficiently in datasets. Why Learn NumPy? NumPy speeds up math operations like addition and multiplication on large groups of numbers compared to regular Python.. Its good for handling large lists of numbers arrays, so you dont have to write complicated loops. It gives ready-to-use functions for statistics, algebra and random numbers. Libraries like Pandas, SciPy, TensorFlow and many others are built on top of NumPy. NumPy uses less memory and stores data more efficiently, which matters when working with lots of data. NumPy Basics This section covers the fundamentals of NumPy, including installation, importing the library and understanding its core functionalities. You will learn about the advantages of NumPy over Python lists and how to set up your environment for efficient numerical computing. Introduction to NumPy Installing NumPy Understanding NumPy Arrays NumPy Arrays NumPy arrays ndarrays are the backbone of the library. This section covers how to create and manipulate arrays effectively for data storage and processing Creating NumPy Arrays Numpy Array Indexing and Slicing Reshaping and Resizing Arrays Stacking and Splitting Arrays Broadcasting in NumPy Mathematical Operations in NumPy This section covers essential mathematical functions for array computations, including basic arithmetic, aggregation and mathematical transformations. Basic Arithmetic Operations Aggregation Functions sum , mean, max , min Universal Functions in Numpy Mathematical Functions in Numpy Linear Algebra with NumPy NumPy provides built-in

Arrays Broadcasting in NumPy Mathematical Operations in NumPy This section covers essential mathematical functions for array computations, including basic arithmetic, aggregation and mathematical transformations. Basic Arithmetic Operations Aggregation Functions sum , mean, max , min Universal Functions in Numpy Mathematical Functions in Numpy Linear Algebra with NumPy NumPy provides built-in functions for linear algebra operations essential for scientific computing and machine learning applications. Matrix Multiplication and Manipulation Matrix vector products in Numpy Determinants and Inverse of a Matrix Inner and Outer Functions Dot and Vdot Functions Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors Random Number Generation and Statistics NumPys random module provides a list of functions for generating random numbers, which are essential for simulations, cryptography and machine learning applications. It supports various probability distributions, such as normal, uniform and Poisson and enable statistical analysis. Generating Random Numbers Normal Distribution Binomial Distribution Poisson Distribution Uniform Distribution Exponential Distribution Chi-square Distribution Statistical Functions mean, median, variance, standard deviation Advanced NumPy Operations This section covers advanced NumPy techniques to enhance performance and handle complex computations. It includes vectorized operations for speed optimization, memory management strategies and integration with Pandas for efficient data analysis. Vectorized Operations for Performance Optimization Broadcasting in Numpy Sparse Matrices in Numpy Working with Images in Numpy NumPy Quiz Test your knowledge of NumPy with this quiz, covering key topics such as array operations, mathematical functions and broadcasting. NumPy Quiz Refer to Practice Exercises, Questions and Solutions for hands-on-numpy problems. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article NumPy Introduction abhishek1 Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Numpy Python Python-numpy Tutorials 1 More Practice Tags : python

K-Mode Clustering in Python Last Updated : 27 Jan, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report K-mode clustering is an unsupervised machine-learning technique used to group a set of data objects into a specified number of clusters, based on their categorical attributes. The algorithm is called K-Mode because it uses modes i.e. the most frequent values instead of means or medians to represent the clusters. Dissimilarity Measurements between two data objects Similarity and dissimilarity measurements are used to determine the distance between the data objects in the dataset. In the case of K-modes, these distances are calculated using a dissimilarity measure called the Hamming distance. The Hamming distance between two data objects is the number of categorical attributes that differ between the two objects. Let x and y be two categorical data objects defined by m features or attributes. Texdx,y sum_j1m deltax_j,y_jTex Where, Texdeltax_j,y_j begincases 0 text if x_j y_j 1 text if x_jneq y_j endcasesTex For example, consider the following dataset with three categorical attributes: S.No Attribute 1 Attribute 2 Attribute 3 1 A B C 2 A B D 3 A C E 4 B C E To calculate the Hamming distance between data objects 1 and 2, we compare their values for each attribute and count the number of differences. In this case, there is one difference Attribute 3 is C for object 1 and D for object 2, so the Hamming distance between objects 1 and 2 is 1. To calculate the Hamming distance between objects 1 and 3, we again compare their values for each attribute and count the number of differences. In this case, there are two differences Attribute 2 is B for object 1 and C for object 3, and Attribute 3 is C for object 1 and E for object 3, so the Hamming distance between objects 1 and 3 is 2. To calculate the Hamming distance between objects 1 and 4, we again compare their values for each attribute and count the number of differences. In this case, there are three differences Attribute 1 is A for objects 1 and B for object 4, Attribute 2 is B for object 1 and C for object 4, and Attribute 3 is C for objects 1 and E for object 4, so the Hamming distance between objects 1 and 4 is 3. Data objects with a smaller Hamming distance are considered

and B for object 4, Attribute 2 is B for object 1 and C for object 4, and Attribute 3 is C for objects 1 and E for object 4, so the Hamming distance between objects 1 and 4 is 3. Data objects with a smaller Hamming distance are considered more similar, while objects with a larger Hamming distance is considered more dissimilar. How K-Modes clustering works? Unlike hierarchical clustering, KModes requires us to decide the number of clusters K in advance. Heres how it works step by step: Start by picking clusters: Randomly select K data points from the dataset to act as the starting clusters these are called modes. Assign data to clusters: Check how similar each data point is to these clusters using the total number of mismatches and assign each data point to the cluster it matches the most. Update the clusters: Find the most common value the mode for each cluster and update the cluster centers based on this. Repeat the process: Keep repeating steps 2 and 3 until no data points are reassigned to different clusters. Let X be a set of categorical data objects of TexX beginbmatrix x_11, x_1n x_n1, x_nm endbmatrix Tex that can be denoted as TexX X_1,X_2,,X_n Tex . And the mode of Z is a vector TexQ q_1,q_2,,q_m Tex then, minimize TexDX,Q sum_i1ndX_i,Q Tex Apply dissimilarity metric equation for data objects TexDX,Q sum_i1nsum_j1mdeltax_ij,Q Tex Suppose we want to K cluster, Then we have Q Texq_k1,q_k2,.,q_km epsilon QTex TexCQ sum_k1Ksum_i1nsum_j1mdeltax_ij,q_kj Tex Overall, the goal of K-modes clustering is to minimize the dissimilarities between the data objects and the centroids modes of the clusters, using a measure of categorical similarity such as the Hamming distance. Implementation of the k-mode clustering algorithm in Python: Python import numpy as np import pandas as pd data np . array 'A' , 'B' , 'C' , 'B' , 'C' , 'A' , 'C' , 'A' , 'B' , 'A' , 'C' , 'B' , 'A' , 'A' , 'B' k 2 np . random . seed 0 modes data np . random . choice data . shape 0 , k , replace False clusters np . zeros data . shape 0 , dtype int for _ in range 10 : for i , point in enumerate data : distances np . sum point ! mode for mode in modes clusters i np . argmin distances

. shape 0 , k , replace False clusters np . zeros data . shape 0 , dtype int for _ in range 10 : for i , point in enumerate data : distances np . sum point ! mode for mode in modes clusters i np . argmin distances for j in range k : if np . any clusters j : modes j pd . DataFrame data clusters j . mode . iloc 0 . values print "Cluster assignments:" , clusters print "Cluster modes:" , modes Output Cluster assignments: 1 0 0 0 0 Cluster modes: 'A' 'A' 'B' 'A' 'B' 'C' This code groups similar rows from a dataset with letters like A, B, C into clusters using a method called KModes . First, it picks a few rows randomly as starting points cluster centers. Then, for each row in the dataset, it checks which cluster it is most similar to by counting the differences mismatches between the row and the cluster centers. Once all rows are assigned to clusters, it updates each cluster center to be the most common value mode in that group. This process repeats until no rows change their cluster. Finally, the code shows which rows belong to which cluster and the values representing each cluster. Cluster with kmodes library. Python pip install kmodes Find the optimal number of clusters in the K-Mode algorithm? Elbow method is used to find the optimal number of clusters Python import pandas as pd import numpy as np !pip install kmodes from kmodes.kmodes import KModes import matplotlib.pyplot as plt matplotlib inline cost K range 1 , 5 for k in list K : kmode KModes n_clusters k , init "random" , n_init 5 , verbose 1 kmode . fit_predict data cost . append kmode . cost_ plt . plot K , cost , 'x-' plt . xlabel 'No. of clusters' plt . ylabel 'Cost' plt . title 'Elbow Curve' plt . show Outputs : Elbow Method As we can see from the graph there is an elbow-like shape at 2.0 and 3.0 Now it we can consider either 2.0 or 3.0 cluster. Lets consider Number of cluster 2.0 Python kmode KModes n_clusters 2 , init "random" , n_init 5 , verbose 1 clusters kmode . fit_predict data clusters Outputs : array1, 0, 1, 1, 1, dtypeuint16 This also shows that the first, third, fourth, and fifth data

either 2.0 or 3.0 cluster. Lets consider Number of cluster 2.0 Python kmode KModes n_clusters 2 , init "random" , n_init 5 , verbose 1 clusters kmode . fit_predict data clusters Outputs : array1, 0, 1, 1, 1, dtypeuint16 This also shows that the first, third, fourth, and fifth data points have been assigned to the first cluster, and the second data points have been assigned to the second cluster. So, our previous answer was 100 correct. Conclusion : K-Modes is a clustering method used to group data with categories, like colors or types. Unlike K-Means, which works with numbers, K-Modes finds groups by checking how similar the data is and using the most common value mode as the group center. To find the best number of groups, we use the Elbow Method , which helps us see when adding more groups doesnt make a big difference. K-Modes is an easy and effective way to group similar data when working with categories Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Fuzzy C-means Clustering in MATLAB vinayedula Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Machine Learning AI-ML-DS With Python Practice Tags : Machine Learning

Copyright Information Copyright Information This to Affirm that GeeksforGeeks is the Copyright Holder Owner of the Contents such as Videos, Photos, Visuals, Questions or any other Literary work which are Created or Published on its website under the Copy Right Act 1957 and that any Unauthorized Transmission, Publication or Usage of the said Contents without any prior knowledge or written permission shall be treated as the illegal use of the same, which is strictly prohibited under the eyes of Law. Where the same shall be treated as Infringement of our rights inferred by the Copy Right Act, therefore shall attract appropriate Legal Proceedings against the said Infringer without any prior information. However, Plagiarism AI Abuse Policy Authors are not permitted to employ bots or other forms of artificial intelligence while creating content. If bots, artificial intelligence, or other sources are utilized for a phraseidea, proper acknowledgment must be given to the exact source, otherwise it may be considered plagiarism or copyright infringement. Authors are only allowed to reference material from other sources, bots, and artificial intelligence up to 20 of the time, and if they are discovered to be copying content from such sources more than 20 of the time, they will be requested to modify the article. If the author fails to rectify the content, action as deemed appropriate will be taken against them, which might also result in rejection of the said article. If an author is found to be copying content from bots, artificial intelligence of any kind or any other source online or offline, they shall face the following consequences: First time: If an author is found to be copying content from other sources or using botsAI for generating content for the first time, the said article shall not be published and no remunerations shall be given for the same. The author shall be informed of the reason their article was rejected. Second time: If an author is found to be copying content from elsewhere or using botsAI for generating content the second time, the article shall not be considered, no remuneration shall be given and a warning will be issued. Third time: If an author is caught copying content from elsewhere for the third time, the work will not be published and the authors contract will be terminated. If an author is found to have copied an article retrospectively, following actions shall be taken: If

a warning will be issued. Third time: If an author is caught copying content from elsewhere for the third time, the work will not be published and the authors contract will be terminated. If an author is found to have copied an article retrospectively, following actions shall be taken: If one article is found to be plagiarized retrospectively or it is found that the author used botsAI of any kind, the article shall be deleted and payment for the same shall be adjusted in future payments. If two articles are found to be plagiarized retrospectively or it is found that the author used botsAI of any kind, the articles shall be deleted and payment for the same shall be adjusted in future payments. If three or more articles are discovered to be retrospectively plagiarized, or if the author used botsAI of any type, the articles will be removed, and the authors contract will be reviewed. Payment will be adjusted accordingly, either by the author or in the current payment cycle. Therefore we believe you will comply with the above-said points to attribute the content in the right spirit.

CART Classification And Regression Tree in Machine Learning Last Updated : 19 Sep, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report CART Classification And Regression Trees is a variation of the decision tree algorithm. It can handle both classification and regression tasks. Scikit-Learn uses the Classification And Regression Tree CART algorithm to train Decision Trees also called growing trees. CART was first produced by Leo Breiman, Jerome Friedman, Richard Olshen, and Charles Stone in 1984. CARTClassification And Regression Tree for Decision Tree CART is a predictive algorithm used in Machine learning and it explains how the target variables values can be predicted based on other matters. It is a decision tree where each fork is split into a predictor variable and each node has a prediction for the target variable at the end. The term CART serves as a generic term for the following categories of decision trees: Classification Trees: The tree is used to determine which class the target variable is most likely to fall into when it is continuous. Regression trees: These are used to predict a continuous variables value. In the decision tree , nodes are split into sub-nodes based on a threshold value of an attribute. The root node is taken as the training set and is split into two by considering the best attribute and threshold value. Further, the subsets are also split using the same logic. This continues till the last pure sub-set is found in the tree or the maximum number of leaves possible in that growing tree. CART Algorithm Classification and Regression Trees CART is a decision tree algorithm that is used for both classification and regression tasks. It is a supervised learning algorithm that learns from labelled data to predict unseen data. Tree structure: CART builds a tree-like structure consisting of nodes and branches. The nodes represent different decision points, and the branches represent the possible outcomes of those decisions. The leaf nodes in the tree contain a predicted class label or value for the target variable. Splitting criteria: CART uses a greedy approach to split the data at each node. It evaluates all possible splits and selects the one that best reduces the impurity of the resulting subsets. For classification tasks, CART uses Gini impurity as the splitting criterion. The lower the Gini impurity, the more pure the subset is. For regression tasks, CART uses residual reduction as the

node. It evaluates all possible splits and selects the one that best reduces the impurity of the resulting subsets. For classification tasks, CART uses Gini impurity as the splitting criterion. The lower the Gini impurity, the more pure the subset is. For regression tasks, CART uses residual reduction as the splitting criterion. The lower the residual reduction, the better the fit of the model to the data. Pruning: To prevent overfitting of the data, pruning is a technique used to remove the nodes that contribute little to the model accuracy. Cost complexity pruning and information gain pruning are two popular pruning techniques. Cost complexity pruning involves calculating the cost of each node and removing nodes that have a negative cost. Information gain pruning involves calculating the information gain of each node and removing nodes that have a low information gain. How does CART algorithm works? The CART algorithm works via the following process: The best-split point of each input is obtained. Based on the best-split points of each input in Step 1, the new best split point is identified. Split the chosen input according to the best split point. Continue splitting until a stopping rule is satisfied or no further desirable splitting is available. CART algorithm uses Gini Impurity to split the dataset into a decision tree .It does that by searching for the best homogeneity for the sub nodes, with the help of the Gini index criterion. Gini indexGini impurity The Gini index is a metric for the classification tasks in CART. It stores the sum of squared probabilities of each class. It computes the degree of probability of a specific variable that is wrongly being classified when chosen randomly and a variation of the Gini coefficient. It works on categorical variables, provides outcomes either successful or failure and hence conducts binary splitting only. The degree of the Gini index varies from 0 to 1, Where 0 depicts that all the elements are allied to a certain class, or only one class exists there. Gini index close to 1 means a high level of impurity, where each class contains a very small fraction of elements, and A value of 1-1n occurs when the elements are uniformly distributed into n classes and each class has an equal probability of 1n . For example, with two classes, the Gini impurity is 1 12 0.5 . Mathematically, we can write Gini Impurity

a very small fraction of elements, and A value of 1-1n occurs when the elements are uniformly distributed into n classes and each class has an equal probability of 1n . For example, with two classes, the Gini impurity is 1 12 0.5 . Mathematically, we can write Gini Impurity as follows: TexGini 1 -sum_i1n p_i2 Tex where Texp_i Tex is the probability of an object being classified to a particular class. In conclusion, Gini impurity is the probability of misclassification, assuming independent selection of the element and its class based on the class probabilities. CART for Classification A classification tree is an algorithm where the target variable is categorical. The algorithm is then used to identify the Class within which the target variable is most likely to fall. Classification trees are used when the dataset needs to be split into classes that belong to the response variablelike yes or no For classification in decision tree learning algorithm that creates a tree-like structure to predict class labels. The tree consists of nodes, which represent different decision points, and branches, which represent the possible result of those decisions. Predicted class labels are present at each leaf node of the tree. How Does CART for Classification Work? CART for classification works by recursively splitting the training data into smaller and smaller subsets based on certain criteria. The goal is to split the data in a way that minimizes the impurity within each subset. Impurity is a measure of how mixed up the data is in a particular subset. For classification tasks, CART uses Gini impurity Gini Impurity- Gini impurity measures the probability of misclassifying a random instance from a subset labeled according to the majority class. Lower Gini impurity means more purity of the subset. Splitting Criteria- The CART algorithm evaluates all potential splits at every node and chooses the one that best decreases the Gini impurity of the resultant subsets. This process continues until a stopping criterion is reached, like a maximum tree depth or a minimum number of instances in a leaf node. CART for Regression A Regression tree is an algorithm where the target variable is continuous and the tree is used to predict its value. Regression trees are used when the response variable is continuous. For example, if the response variable is the temperature of the day. CART for regression is a decision tree learning method that creates

an algorithm where the target variable is continuous and the tree is used to predict its value. Regression trees are used when the response variable is continuous. For example, if the response variable is the temperature of the day. CART for regression is a decision tree learning method that creates a tree-like structure to predict continuous target variables. The tree consists of nodes that represent different decision points and branches that represent the possible outcomes of those decisions. Predicted values for the target variable are stored in each leaf node of the tree. How Does CART works for Regression? Regression CART works by splitting the training data recursively into smaller subsets based on specific criteria. The objective is to split the data in a way that minimizes the residual reduction in each subset. Residual Reduction- Residual reduction is a measure of how much the average squared difference between the predicted values and the actual values for the target variable is reduced by splitting the subset. The lower the residual reduction, the better the model fits the data. Splitting Criteria- CART evaluates every possible split at each node and selects the one that results in the greatest reduction of residual error in the resulting subsets. This process is repeated until a stopping criterion is met, such as reaching the maximum tree depth or having too few instances in a leaf node. Pseudo-code of the CART algorithm d 0, endtree 0 Note0 1, Node1 0, Node2 0 while endtree 1 if Node2 d -1 Node2 d .... Node2 d1 -2 2 - 2 d1 endtree 1 else do i 2 d -1, 2 d , .... , 2 d1 -2 if Nodei -1 Split tree else Node2i1 -1 Node2i2 -1 end if end do end if d d 1 end while CART model representation CART models are formed by picking input variables and evaluating split points on those variables until an appropriate tree is produced. Steps to create a Decision Tree using the CART algorithm: Greedy algorithm : In this The input space is divided using the Greedy method which is known as a recursive binary spitting. This is a numerical method within which all of the values are aligned and several other split points are tried and assessed using a cost function. Stopping Criterion: As it works its way down the tree with the training data, the recursive binary splitting method

as a recursive binary spitting. This is a numerical method within which all of the values are aligned and several other split points are tried and assessed using a cost function. Stopping Criterion: As it works its way down the tree with the training data, the recursive binary splitting method described above must know when to stop splitting. The most frequent halting method is to utilize a minimum amount of training data allocated to every leaf node. If the count is smaller than the specified threshold, the split is rejected and also the node is considered the last leaf node. Tree pruning: Decision trees complexity is defined as the number of splits in the tree. Trees with fewer branches are recommended as they are simple to grasp and less prone to cluster the data. Working through each leaf node in the tree and evaluating the effect of deleting it using a hold-out test set is the quickest and simplest pruning approach. Data preparation for the CART : No special data preparation is required for the CART algorithm. Decision Tree CART Implementations Here is the code implements the CART algorithm for classifying fruits based on their color and size. It first encodes the categorical data using a LabelEncoder and then trains a CART classifier on the encoded data. Finally, it predicts the fruit type for a new instance and decodes the result back to its original categorical value. Python from sklearn.tree import DecisionTreeClassifier from sklearn.preprocessing import LabelEncoder Define the features and target variable features "red" , "large" , "green" , "small" , "red" , "small" , "yellow" , "large" , "green" , "large" , "orange" , "large" , target_variable "apple" , "lime" , "strawberry" , "banana" , "grape" , "orange" Flatten the features list for encoding flattened_features item for sublist in features for item in sublist Use a single LabelEncoder for all features and target variable le LabelEncoder le . fit flattened_features target_variable Encode features and target variable encoded_features le . transform item for item in features encoded_target le . transform target_variable Create a CART classifier clf DecisionTreeClassifier Train the classifier on the training set clf . fit encoded_features , encoded_target Predict the fruit type for a new instance new_instance "red" , "large" encoded_new_instance le . transform new_instance predicted_fruit_type clf . predict encoded_new_instance decoded_predicted_fruit_type le . inverse_transform predicted_fruit_type print "Predicted fruit type:" , decoded_predicted_fruit_type 0 Output: Predicted fruit type: apple POPULAR

on the training set clf . fit encoded_features , encoded_target Predict the fruit type for a new instance new_instance "red" , "large" encoded_new_instance le . transform new_instance predicted_fruit_type clf . predict encoded_new_instance decoded_predicted_fruit_type le . inverse_transform predicted_fruit_type print "Predicted fruit type:" , decoded_predicted_fruit_type 0 Output: Predicted fruit type: apple POPULAR CART-BASED ALGORITHMS: CART Classification and Regression Trees : The original algorithm that uses binary splits to build decision trees. C4.5 and C5.0 : Extensions of CART that allow for multiway splits and handle categorical variables more effectively. Random Forests: Ensemble methods that use multiple decision trees often CART to improve predictive performance and reduce overfitting. Gradient Boosting Machines GBM: Boosting algorithms that also use decision trees often CART as base learners, sequentially improving model performance. Advantages of CART Results are simplistic. Classification and regression trees are Nonparametric and Nonlinear. Classification and regression trees implicitly perform feature selection. Outliers have no meaningful effect on CART. It requires minimal supervision and produces easy-to-understand models. Limitations of CART Overfitting. High Variance. low bias. the tree structure may be unstable. Applications of the CART algorithm For quick Data insights. In Blood Donors Classification. For environmental and ecological data. In the financial sectors. Frequently asked QuestionFAQs 1. What is CART classification and regression tree? CART is a decision tree algorithm that can be used for both classification and regression tasks. It works by recursively partitioning the data into smaller and smaller subsets based on certain criteria. The goal is to create a tree structure that can accurately predict the target variable for new data points. 2. What is a regression tree in machine learning? A regression tree is a type of decision tree that is used to predict continuous target variables. It works by partitioning the data into smaller and smaller subsets based on certain criteria, and then predicting the average value of the target variable within each subset. 3. What is the difference between a regression tree and a classification tree? A regression tree is used to predict continuous target variables, while a classification tree is used to predict categorical target variables. Regression trees predict the average value of the target variable within each subset, while classification trees predict the most likely class for each data point. 4. What is the difference between cart and decision tree? CART is a specific implementation of the decision tree algorithm. There are other decision tree algorithms, such

predict the average value of the target variable within each subset, while classification trees predict the most likely class for each data point. 4. What is the difference between cart and decision tree? CART is a specific implementation of the decision tree algorithm. There are other decision tree algorithms, such as ID3 and C4.5, that have different splitting criteria and pruning techniques. 5. What is the main difference between classification and regression? Classification is the task of assigning a category to an instance, while regression is the task of predicting a continuous value. For example, classification could be used to predict whether an email is spam or not spam, while regression could be used to predict the price of a house based on its size, location, and amenities. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Decision Tree Classifiers in R Programming T tirumalachandraveni Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Algorithms DSA Machine Learning ML-Classification ML-Regression 2 More Practice Tags : Algorithms Machine Learning

JavaScript Tutorial Last Updated : 20 Mar, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report JavaScript is a programming language used to create dynamic content for websites. It is a lightweight , cross-platform, and single-threaded programming language. JavaScript is an interpreted language that executes code line by line providing more flexibility. HTML adds Structure to a web page, CSS styles it and JavaScript brings it to life by allowing users to interact with elements on the page, such as actions on clicking buttons, filling out forms, and showing animations. JavaScript on the client side is directly executed in the user's browser. Almost all browsers have JavaScript Interpreter and do not need to install any software. There is also a browser console where you can test your JavaScript code. JavaScript is also used on the Server side on Web Servers to access databases, file handling and security features to send responses , to browsers. Webpage in Browser - JavaScript Tutorial Hello World Program This JavaScript Compiler is completely free and easy to use. Here, you can practice various JS Exercises. JavaScript console . log "Hello World!" ; Output Hello World! Why to learn JavaScript? Versatility : JavaScript can be used to develop using ElectronJS websites, games Using Phaser and Three.js , mobile apps using React Native , and more. Client Side: JavaScript is the main language for client-side logic and is supported by almost all browsers. There is a big list of frameworks and libraries like React JS , Angular JS , and Vue JS . Server-Side : With runtime environments like Node.js and Frameworks like Express.js , JavaScript is now widely used for building server-side applications. Machine Learning : With Libraries like Tensorflow.JS, JavaScript can be used to develop and train machine learning models. Please refer to ML in JS for details. Fundamentals Let's Explore JavaScript's fundamentals which will help build you a understanding to start with JavaScript Introduction Using JS in HTML Variables and Datatypes Quiz: Variables Data Types Operators Type Conversion and Coercion Control Flow Statements Quiz: Operators , Control Flow Scope Browser console Functions and Events Functions in JavaScript are reusable blocks of code that perform a specific task. Events are actions that happen in the browser, such as mouse clicks, keyboard input, or page loading. Functions Function binding Hoisting Closures Higher-Order Functions Iterator Function Generator Quiz: Functions Events Event Loop Event Bubbling Quiz: Event Handling

Functions in JavaScript are reusable blocks of code that perform a specific task. Events are actions that happen in the browser, such as mouse clicks, keyboard input, or page loading. Functions Function binding Hoisting Closures Higher-Order Functions Iterator Function Generator Quiz: Functions Events Event Loop Event Bubbling Quiz: Event Handling JavaScript Beginner Projects Now you have a basic understanding of JavaScript. So start with some beginner level projects to clear your concept and to implement in real world applications. Counter Application Prime Number Checker Show and Hide Password Palindrome Checker App JavaScript Carousel Email Validator App Unicode Character Value Random Number Generator Random Password Generator JavaScript Data Structure JavaScript provides a versatile set of data structures that help in efficient data storage, manipulation, and problem-solving. In this section, we will explore each data structure and algorithm in detail. Numbers String Quiz: Numbers , String Array LinkedList Quiz: Arrays , Linked List Map Stack Queue Quiz: Stack , Queue Sorting Algorithms JavaScript's built-in utilities and ES6 enhancements provide additional data structures, including the following WeakMap WeakSet Typed Arrays Deque Priority Queue Heap Quiz: Data Structure To learn data structure and algorithm with JavaScript in detail, you can refer to our DSA with JavaScript Tutorial. Object Oriented Programming Object-Oriented Programming OOP in JavaScript, a concept that enables the structure of code by modeling real-world entities as objects with properties and behaviors. Introduction to OOP Objects Quiz: Objects Classes Constructor Method this Keyword Prototype Static Methods Inheritance Quiz: Classes and Inheritance Encapsulation Abstraction Polymorphism Getters and Setters Quiz: OOP Browser and Document Object Model Browser Object Model Document Object Model Manipulate DOM Elements Event Handling in the DOM Quiz: BOM and DOM Asynchronous JavaScript Callbacks Promise Promise Chaining AsyncAwait Quiz: Asynchronous JavaScript JavaScript Intermediate Projects Now you have a good understanding of JavaScript. So let's implement all these in some real world applications. Price Range Slider with Min-Max Input GitHub Profile Search Toast Notification Multi-Step Progress Bar Quiz App with Timer Expense Tracker Sortable and Filterable Table Dynamic Resume Builder OTP Input Field Student Grade Calculator JavaScript JSON It is a lightweight data format for storing and exchanging data widely used to send data between a server and a client. JSON Tutorial JSON vs JavaScript Object Read JSON File Using JS Parse JSON Data in JS JavaScript JSON Parser JavaScript JSON Complete Reference Quiz: JSON Regular Expression and Validation Regular expressions plays important

format for storing and exchanging data widely used to send data between a server and a client. JSON Tutorial JSON vs JavaScript Object Read JSON File Using JS Parse JSON Data in JS JavaScript JSON Parser JavaScript JSON Complete Reference Quiz: JSON Regular Expression and Validation Regular expressions plays important role for validation. Validations help ensure that data entered by users meets specific criteria. Regular expressions Form Validation Email Validation Number Validation Password Validation URL Validation UserName Validation Quiz: Regular Expressions Exception and Error Handling Exception and Error handling is crucial for ensuring the reliability and stability of JavaScript applications by handling errors effectively Exception Handling throw Statement try-catch Statement Debugging Quiz: Error Handling Debugging Testing and Performance Optimization Unit testing with Jest Memory Management Garbage Collection Lazy Loading Debouncing Throttling Quiz: Testing Optimization Interesting Facts This section covers all the interesting facts and features which made JavaScript so popular and will easy if you are switching from other programming languages also. Data Types Strings Functions 'this' keyword Set Map Arrays Object Complete JavaScript JavaScript Advanced Projects Now you have covered almost all the important concepts of JavaScript. These projects will improve and revise your JavaScript Knowledge. Employee Database Management System Nested Chat Comments Responsive Admin Dashboard Task Scheduler Dragons World Game Tic-Tac-Toe Game QR Code Generator Resize and Compress Images QR Code Scanner or Reader For all lists of Projects follow the article- JavaScript Project Ideas with Source Code JavaScript Quiz This section offers a collection of practice Quiz designed to test and support understanding of various concepts in JavaScript. Quizzes Practice Quiz-1 Practice Quiz-2 Practice Quiz-3 JavaScript Practice The javaScript Coding Practice Problems page offers exercises for all skill levels, covering basic Numbers, String to advanced structures like Stack, Queue. These problems help build a strong foundation and boost confidence in solving real-world coding challenges. Coding Problems JavaScript Exercises JavaScript Exercises, Practice Questions and Solutions JavaScript String Exercise JavaScript Array Exercise JavaScript Coding Questions and Answers JavaScript Programming Examples Interview Questions This section provides a list of interview questions related to JavaScript. JavaScript Interview Questions and Answers 2025 For Begineers Intermediate JavaScript Interview Questions and Answers 2025 Advance JS Interview Questions and Answers 2025 For Experienced JavaScript this Operator Interview Questions JavaScript String Interview Questions JavaScript Array Interview Questions JavaScript Object Interview Questions Top 50 Array Coding Problems for Interviews JavaScript Output Based Interview Questions For a quick

For Begineers Intermediate JavaScript Interview Questions and Answers 2025 Advance JS Interview Questions and Answers 2025 For Experienced JavaScript this Operator Interview Questions JavaScript String Interview Questions JavaScript Array Interview Questions JavaScript Object Interview Questions Top 50 Array Coding Problems for Interviews JavaScript Output Based Interview Questions For a quick recap of JavaScript read the article - JavaScript Cheat Sheet Libraries and Frameworks JavaScript libraries and frameworks play a important role in modern web development. They offer built-in functions and methods that enhance web pages, making them more dynamic and interactive. They handle repetitive tasks, allowing developers to focus on core functionality. Also, they provide project structure and data flow structure that helps to create fast and more reliable applications. JavaScript Tutorial- Libraries and Frameworks Libraries Libraries provide pre-built solutions for common tasks. Developers can use these functions instead of writing code from scratch, saving valuable time. Here are a few popular libraries of JavaScript. Frontend Libraries : React , Preact , Lodash , Moment.js , jQuery , Axios Backend Libraries: Socket.io , JWT , Bcrypt , Passport.js , CORS Frameworks Frameworks, offer a comprehensive structure for building applications. Here are a few popular frameworks of JavaScript. Frontend Frameworks: Vue.js , Angular , Next.js , Nuxt.js , Gatsby , Remix Backend Frameworks: Express.js , NestJS , Koa.js , Sails.js, Fastify FullStack FrameWorks: Meteor.js , Next.js, Nuxt.js, RedwoodJS Features of JavaScript JavaScript is one of the most widely used programming languages, known for its flexibility and versatility in web development. Here are some key features or characteristics: Easy to Learn and Use : JavaScript's syntax is simple and straightforward, making it easy for both beginners and experienced developers to pick up. Interpreted Language : JavaScript is an interpreted language, means it is executed directly by the browser without the need for a compiler. Event-Driven and Asynchronous : JavaScript is designed to handle events, making it ideal for interactive web pages. It supports asynchronous programming, enabling non-blocking operations. Object-Oriented and Functional : JavaScript supports both object-oriented and functional programming. This gives developers the flexibility to structure their code according to their need. Dynamically Typed : In JavaScript, you dont need to declare data types when declaring variables. The language automatically determines the data type at runtime, making it more flexible. Extensive Libraries and Frameworks : JavaScript has a rich ecosystem of libraries and frameworks such as React, Angular, and Vue.js, which simplify

Dynamically Typed : In JavaScript, you dont need to declare data types when declaring variables. The language automatically determines the data type at runtime, making it more flexible. Extensive Libraries and Frameworks : JavaScript has a rich ecosystem of libraries and frameworks such as React, Angular, and Vue.js, which simplify and speed up development for both front-end and back-end projects. Cross-Platform : JavaScript is supported across all modern browsers, allowing the same code to run seamlessly on different operating systems and platforms. Large Community Support : JavaScript benefits from a large, active developer community that contributes to its growth. With numerous resources available, finding help or solutions is always easy. Applications of JavaScript JavaScript is a versatile language that powers various applications, from web development to mobile apps, making it an essential tool for modern programming. Web Development : JavaScript is widely used in web development to create interactive and dynamic websites. Frameworks like React and Angular make front-end development faster, while Node.js is used for building server-side applications. Mobile App Development : JavaScript helps in developing mobile apps using frameworks like React Native, allowing developers to build cross-platform apps for both iOS and Android. Game Development : JavaScript is also used for creating browser-based games with libraries like Phaser, making it easy to develop 2D games that run directly in the browser. Server-Side Development : With Node.js, JavaScript is used for server-side programming, enabling developers to build scalable applications and APIs, especially for real-time features like chat systems. Scripting Automation : JavaScript is ideal for automating web-related tasks like form validation and data manipulation, improving efficiency and reducing manual work. Web Scraping : JavaScript, along with libraries like Puppeteer , is used to extract information from websites for data analysis or research, making it useful for web scraping tasks. IoT Internet of Things : JavaScript is used to control devices and sensors in IoT projects, allowing developers to build smart systems with frameworks like Johnny-Five. Real-Time Applications : JavaScript powers real-time applications, such as live chats or notifications, using technologies like WebSockets and Socket.io for instant communication between users and servers. JavaScript vs. Other Programming Languages Below is a comparison of JavaScript with Python, C, and Java: Feature JavaScript Python C Java Type Interpreted Interpreted Compiled Compiled and Interpreted Paradigm Multi-paradigm event-driven, functional, object-oriented Multi-paradigm object-oriented, procedural, functional Multi-paradigm procedural, object-oriented, generic Object-oriented, structured Memory Management Automatic Garbage collection

and servers. JavaScript vs. Other Programming Languages Below is a comparison of JavaScript with Python, C, and Java: Feature JavaScript Python C Java Type Interpreted Interpreted Compiled Compiled and Interpreted Paradigm Multi-paradigm event-driven, functional, object-oriented Multi-paradigm object-oriented, procedural, functional Multi-paradigm procedural, object-oriented, generic Object-oriented, structured Memory Management Automatic Garbage collection Automatic Garbage collection Manual Automatic Garbage collection Syntax Simple Simple Complex Complex Use Cases Web development, mobile apps, real-time applications Web development, data analysis, machine learning System programming, game development, high-performance applications Large-scale applications, enterprise software Notable FrameworksLibraries React, Angular, Node.js Django, Flask Standard Library, Boost Spring, Hibernate Community Support Strong Strong Strong Strong Job Market Abundant Abundant Abundant Abundant List of Companies Using JavaScript These are some popular companies that use JavaScript in their workflow Company Description Google Google uses JavaScript extensively in its web services, including Gmail and Google Maps. Facebook Facebooks front-end is built with React, a JavaScript library, for a dynamic user interface. Netflix Netflix uses JavaScript for their interactive user interface and in their backend services. Airbnb Airbnb relies on JavaScript, using Node.js for scalable back-end development and React for the front end. LinkedIn LinkedIn uses JavaScript for both front-end and back-end development, enabling real-time interaction. Uber JavaScript is used by Uber for real-time tracking and routing, employing both front-end and back-end technologies. Twitter Twitter uses JavaScript for handling its dynamic feeds and providing a seamless user experience. PayPal PayPals front-end is powered by JavaScript, offering smooth, interactive user experiences. eBay eBay uses JavaScript to build their responsive, dynamic web applications and enhance user interactions. Slack Slack's web client and several of its real-time communication features are powered by JavaScript. Career Jobs in JavaScript JavaScript opens up a variety of career opportunities, as it is essential for web development, app creation, and dynamic user interfaces. Here are some top career paths for JavaScript developers Career Average Salary INR Per Annum Average Salary USD Per Annum JavaScript Developer 500,000 1,200,000 60,000 110,000 Front-End Developer 600,000 1,400,000 65,000 120,000 Full Stack Developer 700,000 1,500,000 75,000 130,000 Back-End Developer 600,000 1,300,000 70,000 125,000 Web Developer 500,000 1,200,000 55,000 100,000 React Developer 600,000 1,300,000 70,000 125,000 Node.js Developer 700,000 1,600,000 75,000 135,000 UXUI Designer 600,000 1,300,000 65,000 120,000 Software Engineer 500,000 1,500,000 65,000 120,000 If you are a person, who is more into study from Courses. JavaScript Course Provides you Complete Beginner to Advanced learning. Get detailed list of

Django Tutorial Learn Django Framework Last Updated : 15 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Django, built with Python, is designed to help developers build secure, scalable, and feature-rich web applications quickly and efficiently. Whether youre a beginner looking to create your first dynamic website or an experienced developer aiming to enhance your skills, this tutorial will guide you through Djangos core concepts. This also tutorial provides you with Django projects to help you apply your knowledge and build some cool web applications. These projects not only provide you with experience in building with the Django framework but will also add value to your resume. This Python Django tutorial teaches basic to advanced Django concepts for backend development . Learn topics like forms , templates , views, ORM, etc. Python Django Python-based web framework Django allows you to create efficient web applications quickly. It is also called batteries included web framework Django because It provides built-in features for everything including Django Admin Interface, default database SQLlite3, etc. When youre building a website, you always need a similar set of components: a way to handle user authentication signing up, signing in, signing out, a management panel for your website, forms, a way to upload files, etc. Django Python gives you ready-made components to use for rapid development. There any many more benefits of using the Django framework. Lets look at some other reasons why you should learn Python Frameworks in Django. Table of Content Why Use Django Framework? Getting Started with Django Django Views Django URLs Django Templates Django Models Django Forms Django Projects Online Django Quiz Python Django Interview Question Why Use Django Framework? Excellent documentation and high scalability. Used by Top MNCs and Companies, such as Instagram, Disqus, Spotify, Youtube, Bitbucket, Dropbox, etc. and the list is never-ending. Web framework Django is easy to learn, rapid development, and Batteries fully included. The last but not least reason to learn Django in Python , It has a huge library and features such as Web Scraping, Machine Learning, Image Processing, Scientific Computing, etc. One can integrate all this with web applications and do lots and lots of advanced stuff. Hostingers VPS hosting is built for developers looking to seamlessly integrate Django and other frameworks like Node.js. With full root access and support for multiple OS options , you get total control over your environment. Enjoy lightning-fast performance,

this with web applications and do lots and lots of advanced stuff. Hostingers VPS hosting is built for developers looking to seamlessly integrate Django and other frameworks like Node.js. With full root access and support for multiple OS options , you get total control over your environment. Enjoy lightning-fast performance, robust security, automated backups , and one-click app installations plus, the flexibility to scale as your projects grow. Its the perfect foundation for developing and deploying your Django applications with ease Prerequisites to Learn Django Web framework Django based on Python. You have good knowledge about Python. Some other concepts you should be familiar with are: Understanding of Syntax of Python . Understanding of importing and exporting modules is required in the project development phase. Understanding Python path concepts t o access the data, images or any kind of data. Knowledge of Object Oriented concepts as it reduces the code repetition with classes and objects. Knowledge about HTML , CSS , JavaScript are very important. As they are the building block of Web development . Knowledge about Data Structures like Tuple and List are important. Getting Started with Django In this getting started with Django section, you will learn how to get up and running with Django, a powerful web framework for building dynamic websites and applications. Django makes it easy to organize your project into different apps, each handling specific functionality. Youll begin by creating a project, which will automatically set up everything you need, from a folder structure to basic settings. Django Introduction and Installation When to Use Django? Comparison with other Development Stacks Django Project MVT Structure Django Basics Create an App in Django Create a Basic Project using MVT in Django Once youve mastered the basics from this tutorial, the Complete Django Web Development Course Basics to Advance is a perfect next step to dive deeper into both beginner and advanced Django concepts. Django Views In Django views are the backbone of handling user requests and rendering responses. There are two primary paradigms for implementing views: Function Based Views FBVs and Class Based Views CBVs. Function Based Views offer simplicity and directness, allowing developers to define views as Python functions. Within this paradigm, common functionalities like creating, listing, displaying details, updating, and deleting objects are implemented as separate functions. While both paradigms have their merits, the choice between FBVs and CBVs ultimately depends on factors such

Based Views offer simplicity and directness, allowing developers to define views as Python functions. Within this paradigm, common functionalities like creating, listing, displaying details, updating, and deleting objects are implemented as separate functions. While both paradigms have their merits, the choice between FBVs and CBVs ultimately depends on factors such as project requirements, development preferences, and scalability concerns. Function Based Views Create View List View Detail View Update View Delete View Class Based Generic Views Django Createview ListView DetailView UpdateView DeleteView FormView Class Based vs Function Based Views Django URLs In Django URL patterns serve as a crucial mechanism for directing incoming requests to the appropriate views within your web application. With the flexibility of regular expressions, Djangos URL dispatcher allows you to define patterns that match specific URL patterns and route them to corresponding views. When dealing with GET parameters passed through URLs in Django, accessing these parameters within views is straightforward, enabling efficient handling of user inputs and customization of responses. Django URL patterns Get parameters passed by urls in Django URL Validator in Django URL Shortener with Django Django URLResolver error Django Templates In Django, URLs play a crucial role in navigating through different views and templates within your web application. When working with Django templates , several key concepts enhance the flexibility and functionality of your frontend. Template filters allow you to manipulate variables displayed in your templates, enabling transformations like date formatting or string manipulation. Template Filters Template Tags variables Boolean Operators for loop if Django Templates Template Inheritance Django Models Django Models serve as the backbone of database operations, facilitating seamless management of data. This guide delves into various aspects of Django Models, starting from the fundamental operations of inserting, updating, and deleting data using the Object-Relational Mapping ORM provided by Django. Here, Youll learn how to create a basic app model, initialize migrations, and execute them to synchronize your database schema. Moreover, we delve into built-in field validations, ensuring data integrity and consistency, while also delving into the customization of these validations to suit specific application requirements. ORM Inserting, Updating Deleting Data Basic App Model Makemigrations and Migrate model data types and fields list Add the slug field inside Django Model Intermediate fields in Django Uploading images in Django Render Model in Django Admin Interface Change Object Display Name using __str__ function Django Models Built-in Field Validations Django Models Custom Field Validations in

App Model Makemigrations and Migrate model data types and fields list Add the slug field inside Django Model Intermediate fields in Django Uploading images in Django Render Model in Django Admin Interface Change Object Display Name using __str__ function Django Models Built-in Field Validations Django Models Custom Field Validations in Django Models How to use Django Field Choices ? Overriding the save method Django Django Forms To start, you can create a form using Django Forms by defining a class that inherits from Djangos forms.Form class. Within this class, you can specify the fields you want to include in your form using various field types provided by Django, such as CharField, IntegerField, EmailField, etc. Once youve defined your form, you can render HTML forms in Django using both GET and POST methods. Djangos built-in template tags and filters make it easy to render forms in your HTML templates while ensuring security and CSRF protection. Django Forms offer a wide range of field types to cater to different data types and validation requirements. Additionally, you can customize the appearance and behavior of form fields by using form field custom widgets, allowing you to enhance user experience and tailor forms to your specific needs. How to create a form using Django Forms ? Render HTML Forms GET POST in Django Django Form Fields form field custom widgets Initial form data Django Forms ModelForm Create form from Models Render Form Fields Manually Django Formsets Django ModelFormSets Misc Handling Ajax request in Django User groups with Custom permissions in Django Django Admin Interface Extending and customizing django-allauth Django Dealing with warnings Sessions framework using django Django Sign Up and login with confirmation Email After completing the tutorial and building some projects you might be interested in starting your career in Django development. We have provided a guide, that will help you in building your career as Django developer . Django Projects In this section, well explore how to structure and manage Django projects , which are the core framework for building any web application. These projects act as containers for multiple apps that handle specific functionalities, such as user authentication, blog management, or e-commerce operations. Google authentication and Fetching mails from scratch ToDo webapp using Django Django News App Weather app using Django College Management System Using Django E-Commerce Website Using Django Creating Word Counter App Using Django Voting System Project Using Django Online

specific functionalities, such as user authentication, blog management, or e-commerce operations. Google authentication and Fetching mails from scratch ToDo webapp using Django Django News App Weather app using Django College Management System Using Django E-Commerce Website Using Django Creating Word Counter App Using Django Voting System Project Using Django Online Django Quiz Test your Django knowledge by answering quiz questions. The quiz questions are meant to test your understanding of Django concepts. Take Django Quiz Python Django Interview Question Interviews are most important aspect of job recruitment and you need to prepare for interviews if you want to get job sooner. We have compiled some of the most asked interview questions for Django Developers. Visit the page Top 50 Django Interview Questions and Answers to check for interview questions. Features of Django Rapid Development : Djangos DRY principle accelerates development by reducing code repetition. Admin Interface : Comes with a ready-to-use, customizable admin panel for easy backend management. Scalable : Built to handle high traffic and complex applications, ideal for projects of any size. Security : Offers built-in protections against common security threats like XSS, CSRF, and SQL injection. ORM : Simplifies database interaction using Python, eliminating the need for raw SQL. URL Routing : Clean, readable URLs with easy mapping to views. Template Engine : Separates logic from presentation for dynamic, reusable web pages. Extensive Documentation : Well-organized resources for troubleshooting and learning. Active Community : Large community support with abundant third-party plugins and tools. Applications of Django Django is a versatile web framework used in a wide range of industries and projects. Here are some common applications: Content Management Systems CMS : Django is ideal for building custom CMS platforms due to its modularity and flexibility. E-commerce Sites : Platforms like e-commerce websites benefit from Djangos scalability and robust security features. Social Networking Platforms : Djangos ability to handle high traffic makes it perfect for social media apps and community-based websites. Data-Driven Applications : With its powerful ORM and database management capabilities, Django is great for building applications that rely on large datasets. API Development : Django, coupled with Django REST Framework DRF, makes it simple to develop robust and scalable APIs. Scientific Computing Platforms : Django is used in platforms that require complex data analysis and visualization. News Publishing Platforms : Its ability to manage large volumes of content efficiently makes it a go-to for news websites

with Django REST Framework DRF, makes it simple to develop robust and scalable APIs. Scientific Computing Platforms : Django is used in platforms that require complex data analysis and visualization. News Publishing Platforms : Its ability to manage large volumes of content efficiently makes it a go-to for news websites and online publications. Educational Platforms : Many e-learning websites and educational tools are built with Django for its scalability and security. Django vs. Other Web Frameworks Feature Django Java Spring Boot Express.js Language Python Java JavaScript Node.js Architecture Full-stack MVT Full-stack MVC Minimalist Admin Interface Built-in admin interface No built-in admin interface No built-in admin interface Development Speed Fast due to built-in features Medium more setup required Fast simple routing Scalability Highly scalable Highly scalable Highly scalable Security Excellent with built-in protections Excellent strong security features Needs additional security measures ORM Powerful ORM built-in Powerful ORM Hibernate No built-in ORM Flexibility Moderate convention over configuration High highly configurable High minimalist with custom flexibility Documentation Extensive and detailed Extensive and detailed Good but less detailed Best for Full-scale apps, CMS, e-commerce Enterprise-level applications, APIs Real-time apps, APIs, microservices Learning Curve Moderate due to its many features Steeper requires understanding of Java ecosystem Moderate Use Cases Social networks, CMS, e-commerce Large-scale enterprise applications Real-time apps, microservices Careers with Django Heres a table showcasing some common Django career roles along with their approximate salary ranges in both INR and USD : Career Role Salary INRyear Salary USDyear Django Developer 4,00,000 10,00,000 50,000 90,000 Full-Stack Developer 6,00,000 15,00,000 60,000 120,000 Software Engineer 5,00,000 12,00,000 70,000 110,000 DevOps Engineer 8,00,000 18,00,000 80,000 140,000 Technical LeadArchitect 12,00,000 25,00,000 100,000 180,000 Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Django Basics abhishek1 Follow Improve Article Tags : Django Python Django Spotlight Tutorials

Cost function in Logistic Regression in Machine Learning Last Updated : 05 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Logistic Regression is one of the simplest classification algorithms we learn while exploring machine learning algorithms. In this article, we will explore cross-entropy, a cost function used for logistic regression. What is Logistic Regression? Logistic Regression is a statistical method used for binary classification. Despite its name, it is employed for predicting the probability of an instance belonging to a particular class. It models the relationship between input features and the log odds of the event occurring, where the event is typically represented by the binary outcome 0 or 1. The output of logistic regression is transformed using the logistic function sigmoid, which maps any real-valued number to a value between 0 and 1. This transformed value can be interpreted as the probability of the instance belonging to the positive class. Why do we need Logistic Regression? Even when we have a linear regression algorithm, why do we need another logistic regression algorithm? To answer this question first we need to understand the problem behind the linear regression for the classification task. Lets consider an example of predicting diabetes based on sugar levels. In this example, we have a dataset with two variables: sugar levels independent variable and the likelihood of having diabetes dependent variable, 1 for diabetic and 0 for non-diabetic. As observed, the linear regression line Tex ymxc Tex fails to accurately capture the relationship between sugar levels and the likelihood of diabetes. It assumes a linear relationship, which is not suitable for this binary classification problem. Extending this line will result in values that are less than 0 and greater than 1, which are not very useful in our classification problem. This is where logistic regression comes into play, using the sigmoid function to model the probability of an instance belonging to a particular class. Logistic function Logistic function is also known as sigmoid function . It compressed the output of the linear regression between 0 1. It can be defined as: Texsigmafrac11e-ziTex Here, Texzi h_thetatheta_1x_itheta_2Tex is the linear combination of input features and model parameters. The predicted probability TexsigmaTex is the output of this sigmoid function. e is the base of the natural logarithm, approximately equal to 2.718 When we applied the logistic functions to the output of the linear regression. it can be

h_thetatheta_1x_itheta_2Tex is the linear combination of input features and model parameters. The predicted probability TexsigmaTex is the output of this sigmoid function. e is the base of the natural logarithm, approximately equal to 2.718 When we applied the logistic functions to the output of the linear regression. it can be observed like: As evident in the plot, sigmoid function is accurately separating the classes for binary classification tasks. Also, it produces continuous values exclusively within the 0 to 1 range, which can be employed for predictive purposes. What is Cost Function? A cost function is a mathematical function that calculates the difference between the target actual values ground truth and the values predicted by the model. A function that assesses a machine learning models performance also referred to as a loss function or objective function . Usually, the objective of a machine learning algorithm is to reduce the error or output of cost function. When it comes to Linear Regression , the conventional Cost Function employed is the Mean Squared Error . The cost function J for m training samples can be written as: TexbeginalignedJtheta frac12m sum_i 1m zi yi2 frac12m sum_i 1m h_thetaxi yi2 endalignedTex where, Texyi Tex is the actual value of the target variable for the i-th training example. Texzih_thetaxiTex is the predicted value of the target variable for the i-th training example, calculated using the linear regression model with parameters θ. Texxi Tex is the i-th training example. m is number of training examples. Plotting this specific error function against the linear regression models weight parameters results in a convex shape. This convexity is important because it allows the Gradient Descent Algorithm to be used to optimize the function. Using this algorithm, we can locate the global minima on the graph and modify the models weights to systematically lower the error. In essence, its a means of optimizing the model to raise its accuracy in making predictions. Why Mean Squared Error cannot be used as cost function for Logistic Regression Lets consider the Mean Squared Error MSE as a cost function, but it is not suitable for logistic regression due to its nonlinearity introduced by the sigmoid function. In logistic regression, if we substitute the sigmoid function into the above MSE equation, we get: Texbeginaligned Jtheta frac12m sum_i 1msigmai yi2 frac12m sum_i1m leftfrac11 e-zi yiright2 frac12m sum_i1m leftfrac11 e-theta_1xitheta_2 yiright2endalignedTex The equation Texfrac11 e-zTex is a

for logistic regression due to its nonlinearity introduced by the sigmoid function. In logistic regression, if we substitute the sigmoid function into the above MSE equation, we get: Texbeginaligned Jtheta frac12m sum_i 1msigmai yi2 frac12m sum_i1m leftfrac11 e-zi yiright2 frac12m sum_i1m leftfrac11 e-theta_1xitheta_2 yiright2endalignedTex The equation Texfrac11 e-zTex is a nonlinear transformation, and evaluating this term within the Mean Squared Error formula results in a non-convex cost function. A non-convex function, have multiple local minima which can make it difficult to optimize using traditional gradient descent algorithms as shown below. Lets break down the nonlinearity introduced by the sigmoid function and the impact on the cost function: Sigmoid Function Nonlinearity 1. When z is large and positive, e -z becomes very small, and Texfrac11e-z Tex approaches 1. Example: when z5, Tex beginaligned frac11e-5 frac11frac1e5 frac1frace51e5 frace5e51 0.9933071490757153 endalignedTex Which is close to 1 indicating that the sigmoid function, when applied to a large positive value like 5, outputs a probability close to 1, suggesting a high confidence in the positive class. 2. When z is large and negative, e -z dominates, and Texfrac11e-zTex approaches 0. Example, when z -5, the expression becomes, Tex beginaligned frac11e--5 frac11e5 0.0066928509242848554 endalignedTex Which is close to 0 indicating that sigmoid function, when applied to a large negative value like -5, outputs a probability close to 0. In other words, when z is a large negative number, the exponential term TexezTex dominates the denominator, causing the sigmoid function to approach 0. Squaring within the MSE Formula The Mean Squared Error MSE formula involves squaring the difference between the predicted probability and the true label. In general Squaring the term Texfrac11e-z-yTex magnifies the errors when the predicted probability is far from the true label. but if the difference between the actual and predicted is in between 0 1 squaring the values will get lesser values. Example 1: If the true label y is 1 and the predicted probability Texfrac11e-z 0.2Tex , Squaring the difference : Tex1-0.22 0.82 0.64 0.8Tex Gives a lesser error than the predicted probability was, say, 0.8. The squaring operation intensifies the impact of misclassifications, especially when TexhatyTex is close to 0 or 1. While dealing with an optimization problem with Non-convex graph we face the problem of getting stuck at the local minima instead of the global minima. The presence of multiple local minima can make it challenging to find the optimal

of misclassifications, especially when TexhatyTex is close to 0 or 1. While dealing with an optimization problem with Non-convex graph we face the problem of getting stuck at the local minima instead of the global minima. The presence of multiple local minima can make it challenging to find the optimal solution for a machine learning model. If the model gets trapped in a local minimum, it will not achieve the best possible performance. Thats where comes Log Loss or Cross Entropy Function most important term in the case of logistic regression. Log Loss for Logistic regression Log loss is a classification evaluation metric that is used to compare different models which we build during the process of model development. It is considered one of the efficient metrics for evaluation purposes while dealing with the soft probabilities predicted by the model. The log of corrected probabilities, in logistic regression, is obtained by taking the natural logarithm base e of the predicted probabilities. Texbeginalignedtextlog loss lnsigma lnfrac11e-zendalignedTex Lets find the log odds for the examples, z5 Tex beginaligned lnz5lnfrac11e-5 lnleft frac11frac1e5 right lnleft frace51e5 right lne5-ln1e5 5 ln12.785 5 ln12.718285 5-5.006712007735388approx -0.00671200endalignedTex and for z-5, Tex beginaligned lnz-5lnfrac11e--5 lnleft frac11e5 right ln1-ln1e5 0 ln12.785 ln12.718285approx -5.00671200endalignedTex These log values are negative. In order to maintain the common convention that lower loss scores are better, we take the negative average of these values to deal with the negative sign. Hence, The Log Loss can be summarized with the following formula: TexJ -sum_i1my_ilog left h_thetaleft x_i right right left 1-y_i right log left 1- h_thetaleft x_i right right Tex where, m is the number of training examples Texy_iTex is the true class label for the i-th example either 0 or 1. Texh_thetax_iTex is the predicted probability for the i-th example, as calculated by the logistic regression model. TexthetaTex is the model parameters The first term in the sum represents the cross-entropy for the positive class Texy_i 1Tex , and the second term represents the cross-entropy for the negative class Texy_i 0Tex . The goal of logistic regression is to minimize the cost function by adjusting the model parameters TexthetaTex In summary: Calculate predicted probabilities using the sigmoid function. Apply the natural logarithm to the corrected probabilities. Sum up and average the log values, then negate the result to get the Log Loss. Cost function for Logistic Regression TexCosth_thetax,y leftbeginmatrix -logh_thetax ify1 -log1-h_thetax if y

adjusting the model parameters TexthetaTex In summary: Calculate predicted probabilities using the sigmoid function. Apply the natural logarithm to the corrected probabilities. Sum up and average the log values, then negate the result to get the Log Loss. Cost function for Logistic Regression TexCosth_thetax,y leftbeginmatrix -logh_thetax ify1 -log1-h_thetax if y 0 endmatrixright. Tex Case 1: If y 1, that is the true label of the class is 1. Cost 0 if the predicted value of the label is 1 as well. But as h θ x deviates from 1 and approaches 0 cost function increases exponentially and tends to infinity which can be appreciated from the below graph as well. Case 2: If y 0, that is the true label of the class is 0. Cost 0 if the predicted value of the label is 0 as well. But as h θ x deviates from 0 and approaches 1 cost function increases exponentially and tends to infinity which can be appreciated from the below graph as well. With the modification of the cost function, we have achieved a loss function that penalizes the model weights more and more as the predicted value of the label deviates more and more from the actual label. Conclusion The choice of cost function, log loss or cross-entropy, is significant for logistic regression. It quantifies the disparity between predicted probabilities and actual outcomes, providing a measure of how well the model aligns with the ground truth. Frequently Asked Questions FAQs 1. What is the difference between the cost function and the loss function for logistic regression? The terms are often used interchangeably, but the cost function typically refers to the average loss over the entire dataset, while the loss function calculates the error for a single data point. 2.Why logistic regression cost function is non convex? The sigmoid function introduces non-linearity, resulting in a non-convex cost function. It has multiple local minima, making optimization challenging, as traditional gradient descent may converge to suboptimal solutions. 3.What is a cost function in simple terms? A cost function measures the disparity between predicted values and actual values in a machine learning model. It quantifies how well the model aligns with the ground truth, guiding optimization. 4.Is the cost function for logistic regression always negative? No, the cost function for logistic regression is not always negative. It includes terms like -loghx and -log1 hx, and the overall value depends

K means Clustering Introduction Last Updated : 15 Jan, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report K-Means Clustering is an Unsupervised Machine Learning algorithm which groups the unlabeled dataset into different clusters. The article aims to explore the fundamentals and working of k means clustering along with its implementation. Understanding K-means Clustering K-means clustering is a technique used to organize data into groups based on their similarity . For example online store uses K-Means to group customers based on purchase frequency and spending creating segments like Budget Shoppers, Frequent Buyers and Big Spenders for personalised marketing. The algorithm works by first randomly picking some central points called centroids and each data point is then assigned to the closest centroid forming a cluster. After all the points are assigned to a cluster the centroids are updated by finding the average position of the points in each cluster. This process repeats until the centroids stop changing forming clusters. The goal of clustering is to divide the data points into clusters so that similar data points belong to same group. How k-means clustering works? We are given a data set of items with certain features and values for these features like a vector. The task is to categorize those items into groups. To achieve this, we will use the K-means algorithm. K in the name of the algorithm represents the number of groupsclusters we want to classify our items into. K means Clustering The algorithm will categorize the items into k groups or clusters of similarity. To calculate that similarity, we will use the Euclidean distance as a measurement. The algorithm works as follows: First, we randomly initialize k points, called means or cluster centroids. We categorize each item to its closest mean, and we update the means coordinates, which are the averages of the items categorized in that cluster so far. We repeat the process for a given number of iterations and at the end, we have our clusters. The points mentioned above are called means because they are the mean values of the items categorized in them. To initialize these means, we have a lot of options. An intuitive method is to initialize the means at random items in the data set. Another method is to initialize the means at random values between the boundaries of the data set. For example for a feature x the items have values

these means, we have a lot of options. An intuitive method is to initialize the means at random items in the data set. Another method is to initialize the means at random values between the boundaries of the data set. For example for a feature x the items have values in 0,3 we will initialize the means with values for x at 0,3. Implementation of K-Means Clustering in Python We will use blobs datasets and show how clusters are made. Step 1: Importing the necessary libraries We are importing Numpy for statistical computations, Matplotlib to plot the graph, and make_blobs from sklearn.datasets. Python import numpy as np import matplotlib.pyplot as plt from sklearn.datasets import make_blobs Step 2 : Create the custom dataset with make_blobs and plot it Python X , y make_blobs n_samples 500 , n_features 2 , centers 3 , random_state 23 fig plt . figure 0 plt . grid True plt . scatter X :, 0 , X :, 1 plt . show Output : Clustering dataset Step 3: Initialize the random centroids The code initializes three clusters for K-means clustering. It sets a random seed and generates random cluster centers within a specified range, and creates an empty list of points for each cluster. Python k 3 clusters np . random . seed 23 for idx in range k : center 2 2 np . random . random X . shape 1 , - 1 points cluster 'center' : center , 'points' : clusters idx cluster clusters Output: 0: 'center': array0.06919154, 1.78785042, 'points': , 1: 'center': array 1.06183904, -0.87041662, 'points': , 2: 'center': array-1.11581855, 0.74488834, 'points': Step 4: Plot the random initialize center with data points Python plt . scatter X :, 0 , X :, 1 plt . grid True for i in clusters : center clusters i 'center' plt . scatter center 0 , center 1 , marker '' , c 'red' plt . show Output : Data points with random center The plot displays a scatter plot of data points X:,0, X:,1 with grid lines. It also marks the initial cluster centers red stars generated for K-means clustering. Step 5: Define Euclidean distance Python def distance p1 , p2 : return np . sqrt np . sum p1 - p2 2 Step 6: Create the function to Assign and Update the cluster center This step assigns data points to the nearest cluster center, and

generated for K-means clustering. Step 5: Define Euclidean distance Python def distance p1 , p2 : return np . sqrt np . sum p1 - p2 2 Step 6: Create the function to Assign and Update the cluster center This step assigns data points to the nearest cluster center, and the M-step updates cluster centers based on the mean of assigned points in K-means clustering. Python def assign_clusters X , clusters : for idx in range X . shape 0 : dist curr_x X idx for i in range k : dis distance curr_x , clusters i 'center' dist . append dis curr_cluster np . argmin dist clusters curr_cluster 'points' . append curr_x return clusters def update_clusters X , clusters : for i in range k : points np . array clusters i 'points' if points . shape 0 0 : new_center points . mean axis 0 clusters i 'center' new_center clusters i 'points' return clusters Step 7: Create the function to Predict the cluster for the datapoints Python def pred_cluster X , clusters : pred for i in range X . shape 0 : dist for j in range k : dist . append distance X i , clusters j 'center' pred . append np . argmin dist return pred Step 8: Assign, Update, and predict the cluster center Python clusters assign_clusters X , clusters clusters update_clusters X , clusters pred pred_cluster X , clusters Step 9: Plot the data points with their predicted cluster center Python plt . scatter X :, 0 , X :, 1 , c pred for i in clusters : center clusters i 'center' plt . scatter center 0 , center 1 , marker '' , c 'red' plt . show Output : K-means Clustering The plot shows data points colored by their predicted clusters. The red markers represent the updated cluster centers after the E-M steps in the K-means clustering algorithm. Now, what is Elbow Method? : It is a graphical tool used to determine the optimal number of clusters k in K-means. Selecting the right number of clusters is crucial for meaningful segmentation. Please refer to Elbow Method for optimal value of k in KMeans . In conclusion, K-means clustering is a powerful unsupervised machine learning algorithm for grouping unlabeled datasets. Its objective is to divide data into clusters, making similar data points part of the same group. The algorithm initializes cluster

ML Credit Card Fraud Detection Last Updated : 09 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Fraudulent credit card transactions are a significant challenge for financial institutions and consumers alike. Detecting these fraudulent activities in real-time is important to prevent financial losses and protect customers from unauthorized charges. In this article we will explore how to build a machine learning model to detect fraudulent credit card transactions using Python. Step 1: Importing all the necessary Libraries We begin by importing the necessary Python libraries: numpy , pandas , matplotlib and seaborn for data handling, visualization and model building. Python import numpy as np import pandas as pd import matplotlib.pyplot as plt import seaborn as sns from matplotlib import gridspec Step 2: Loading the Data Load the dataset into a pandas DataFrame and examine its structure. The dataset contains 284,807 transactions with 31 features including: Time : Seconds elapsed between each transaction and the first transaction in the dataset. V1-V28 : Anonymized features obtained via PCA. Amount : Transaction amount. Class : Target variable 0 for normal transactions, 1 for fraudulent transactions. Python data pd . read_csv "credit.csv" print data . head Output: Credit card data received Now, lets explore more about the dataset using df.describe method. Python print data . describe Output : Step 3: Analyze Class Distribution The next step is to check the distribution of fraudulent vs. normal transactions. Python fraud data data 'Class' 1 valid data data 'Class' 0 outlierFraction len fraud float len valid print outlierFraction print 'Fraud Cases: ' . format len data data 'Class' 1 print 'Valid Transactions: ' . format len data data 'Class' 0 Output: Since the dataset is highly imbalanced with only 0.02 fraudulent transactions, well first try to build a model without balancing the dataset. If we dont get satisfactory results, we will explore ways to handle the imbalance. Step 4: Visualize Transaction Amounts Lets compare the transaction amounts for fraudulent and normal transactions. This will help us understand if there are any significant differences in the monetary value of fraudulent transactions. Python print Amount details of the fraudulent transaction fraud . Amount . describe Output : Python print details of valid transaction valid . Amount . describe Output : From the output, we observe that fraudulent transactions tend to have higher average amounts, which is critical in fraud detection. Step 5: Correlation Matrix We can visualize

the fraudulent transaction fraud . Amount . describe Output : Python print details of valid transaction valid . Amount . describe Output : From the output, we observe that fraudulent transactions tend to have higher average amounts, which is critical in fraud detection. Step 5: Correlation Matrix We can visualize the correlation between features using a heatmap. This will give us an understanding of how the different features are correlated and which ones may be more relevant for prediction. Python corrmat data . corr fig plt . figure figsize 12 , 9 sns . heatmap corrmat , vmax .8 , square True plt . show Output: Most features do not correlate strongly with others, but some features e.g., V2 and V5 have a negative correlation with the Amount feature. This provides valuable insights into how the features are related to the transaction amounts. Step 6: Prepare the Data Separate the input features X and target variable Y , then split the data into training and testing sets Python dividing the X and the Y from the dataset X data . drop 'Class' , axis 1 Y data "Class" print X . shape print Y . shape getting just the values for the sake of processing its a numpy array with no columns xData X . values yData Y . values from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split Split the data into training and testing sets xTrain , xTest , yTrain , yTest train_test_split xData , yData , test_size 0.2 , random_state 42 Output : 156612, 30 156612, Step 7: Build and Train the Model Train a Random Forest Classifier to predict fraudulent transactions. Python from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier rfc RandomForestClassifier rfc . fit xTrain , yTrain predictions yPred rfc . predict xTest Step 8: Handling Missing Values Before proceeding with model evaluation, its important to ensure that the dataset does not contain any missing or invalid values e.g., NaN. If your dataset contains missing values in the target variable yTest , you can use the SimpleImputer from sklearn.impute to handle them. Python from sklearn.impute import SimpleImputer print "NaN values in yTest before imputation:" , np . isnan yTest . sum imputer SimpleImputer strategy 'most_frequent' yTest imputer . fit_transform yTest . reshape - 1 , 1 . flatten print "NaN values in yTest after imputation:" , np . isnan yTest . sum Step 9: Evaluate the Model After training the model, we need to

, np . isnan yTest . sum imputer SimpleImputer strategy 'most_frequent' yTest imputer . fit_transform yTest . reshape - 1 , 1 . flatten print "NaN values in yTest after imputation:" , np . isnan yTest . sum Step 9: Evaluate the Model After training the model, we need to evaluate its performance using various metrics, such as accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and the Matthews correlation coefficient. Python from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score , precision_score , recall_score , f1_score , matthews_corrcoef , confusion_matrix Evaluation metrics accuracy accuracy_score yTest , yPred precision precision_score yTest , yPred recall recall_score yTest , yPred f1 f1_score yTest , yPred mcc matthews_corrcoef yTest , yPred print "Model Evaluation Metrics:" print f "Accuracy: accuracy : .4f " print f "Precision: precision : .4f " print f "Recall: recall : .4f " print f "F1-Score: f1 : .4f " print f "Matthews Correlation Coefficient: mcc : .4f " Confusion matrix conf_matrix confusion_matrix yTest , yPred plt . figure figsize 8 , 6 sns . heatmap conf_matrix , annot True , fmt "d" , cmap "Blues" , xticklabels 'Normal' , 'Fraud' , yticklabels 'Normal' , 'Fraud' plt . title "Confusion Matrix" plt . xlabel "Predicted Class" plt . ylabel "True Class" plt . show Output : Model Evaluation Metrics: Accuracy: 0.9996 Precision: 0.9138 Recall: 0.8833 F1-Score: 0.8983 Matthews Correlation Coefficient: 0.8982 The model accuracy is high due to class imbalance so, we will have computed precision, recall and f1 score to get a more meaningful understanding. We observe: high frequency that means the model is good at not incorrectly marking legitimate transactions as fraud. high recall means the model is good at identifying fraudulent transactions. F1-score balances these two, indicating a strong performance. MCC of 0.8982 confirms that the models predictions are well-aligned with the true outcomes, even in the case of imbalanced data. Get complete notebook link here: Notebook Link : click here . Dataset Link : click here . Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Disease Prediction Using Machine Learning A amankrsharma3 Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Machine Learning Project AI-ML-DS With Python Machine Learning Projects python 2 More Practice Tags : Machine Learning python

Random Forest Classifier using Scikit-learn Last Updated : 11 Mar, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Random Forest is a method that combines the predictions of multiple decision trees to produce a more accurate and stable result. It can be used for both classification and regression tasks. In classification tasks, Random Forest Classification predicts categorical outcomes based on the input data. It uses multiple decision trees and outputs the label that has the maximum votes among all the individual tree predictions and in this article we will learn more about it. Working of Random Forest Classifier Random Forest Classification works by creating multiple decision trees each trained on a random subset of data. The process begins with Bootstrap Sampling where random rows of data are selected with replacement to form different training datasets for each tree. Then where only a random subset of features is used to build each tree ensuring diversity across the models. During the training phase Feature Sampling is applied to each tree built by recursively partitioning the data based on the features. At each split the algorithm selects the best feature from the random subset optimizing for information gain or Gini impurity. The process continues until a predefined stopping criterion is met such as reaching maximum depth or having a minimum number of samples in each leaf node. After the trees are trained each tree makes a prediction. The final prediction for classification tasks is determined by majority voting. Random Forest Classifier Benefits of Random Forest Classification: Random Forest can handle large datasets and high-dimensional data. By combining predictions from many decision trees it reduces the risk of overfitting compared to a single decision tree. It is robust to noisy data and works well with categorical data. Implementing Random Forest Classification in Python Before implementing random forest classifier in Python lets first understand its parameters. n_estimators: Number of trees in the forest. max_depth: Maximum depth of each tree. max_features: Number of features considered for splitting at each node. criterion: Function used to measure split quality gini or entropy. min_samples_split: Minimum samples required to split a node. min_samples_leaf: Minimum samples required to be at a leaf node. bootstrap: Whether to use bootstrap sampling when building trees True or False. Now that we know its parameters we can start building it in python. 1. Import Required Libraries We will be importing Pandas, matplotlib, seaborn and

split a node. min_samples_leaf: Minimum samples required to be at a leaf node. bootstrap: Whether to use bootstrap sampling when building trees True or False. Now that we know its parameters we can start building it in python. 1. Import Required Libraries We will be importing Pandas, matplotlib, seaborn and sklearn to build the model. python import pandas as pd import matplotlib.pyplot as plt import seaborn as sns import sklearn from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score , confusion_matrix from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier from sklearn.datasets import load_iris 2. Import Dataset For this well use the Iris Dataset which is available within sklearn . This dataset contains information about three types of Iris flowers and their respective features sepal length, sepal width, petal length and petal width. python iris load_iris df pd . DataFrame data iris . data , columns iris . feature_names df 'target' iris . target df Output: 3. Data Preparation Here we will separate the features X and the target variable y. python X df . iloc :, : - 1 . values y df . iloc :, - 1 . values 4. Splitting the Dataset Well split the dataset into training and testing sets so we can train the model on one part and evaluate it on another. python X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test train_test_split X , y , test_size 0.2 , random_state 42 5. Feature Scaling Feature scaling ensures that all the features are on a similar scale which is important for some machine learning models. However Random Forest is not highly sensitive to feature scaling. But it is a good practice to scale when combining models. python scaler StandardScaler X_train scaler . fit_transform X_train X_test scaler . transform X_test 6. Building Random Forest Classifier We will create the Random Forest Classifier model, train it on the training data and make predictions on the test data. python classifier RandomForestClassifier n_estimators 100 , random_state 42 classifier . fit X_train , y_train y_pred classifier . predict X_test 7. Evaluation of the Model We will evaluate the model using the accuracy score and confusion matrix . python accuracy accuracy_score y_test , y_pred print f 'Accuracy: accuracy 100 : .2f ' conf_matrix confusion_matrix y_test , y_pred plt . figure figsize 8 , 6 sns . heatmap conf_matrix , annot True , fmt 'g' , cmap 'Blues' , cbar False , xticklabels iris .

and confusion matrix . python accuracy accuracy_score y_test , y_pred print f 'Accuracy: accuracy 100 : .2f ' conf_matrix confusion_matrix y_test , y_pred plt . figure figsize 8 , 6 sns . heatmap conf_matrix , annot True , fmt 'g' , cmap 'Blues' , cbar False , xticklabels iris . target_names , yticklabels iris . target_names plt . title 'Confusion Matrix Heatmap' plt . xlabel 'Predicted Labels' plt . ylabel 'True Labels' plt . show Output: Accuracy: 100.00 Confusion Matrix Its perfect accuracy along with the confusion matrix shown by Random Forest Classifier has learned to classify all the instances correctly. However its essential to note that the Iris dataset used here is relatively simple and well-known in the machine learning 8. Feature Importance Random Forest Classifiers also provide insight into which features were the most important in making predictions. We can plot the feature importance. Python feature_importances classifier . feature_importances_ plt . barh iris . feature_names , feature_importances plt . xlabel 'Feature Importance' plt . title 'Feature Importance in Random Forest Classifier' plt . show Output: From the graph we can see that petal width cm is the most important feature followed closely by petal length cm . The sepal width cm and sepal length cm have lower importance in determining the models predictions. This indicates that the classifier relies more on the petal measurements to make predictions about the flower species. Random Forest Classifiers are useful for classification tasks offering high accuracy and robustness. They are easy to use, provide insights into feature importance and can handle complex datasets. Random Forest can also be used for regression problem: Random Forest Regression in Python Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Feature Selection Using Random forest Classifier amandp13 Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Algorithms Machine Learning python Practice Tags : Algorithms Machine Learning python

What Are the Tidyverse Packages in R Language? Last Updated : 03 May, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report When working with Data Science in R then Tidyverse packages is widely used. They were created specifically for data science tasks and follow a consistent design making them easy to use and efficient. Understanding Tidyverse Packages in R There are eight core Tidyverse packages namely ggplot2, dplyr, tidyr, readr, purrr, tibble, stringr and forcats that are mentioned in this article. All of these packages are loaded automatically at once with the install.packagestidyverse command. . Category Popular R Packages Data Visualization and Exploration ggplot2 Data Wrangling and Transformation dplyr , tidyr , stringr , forcats Data Import and Management tibble , readr Functional Programming purrr In addition to these packages it also has some specialized packages that are not loaded automatically but need to be called. It include the DBI for relational databases, httr for web APIs, rvest for web scraping, etc. Now, lets see the core Tidyverse packages and learn more about them: Data Visualization and Exploration in Tidyverse in R 1. ggplot2 library ggplot2 is an R data visualization library that is based on The Grammar of Graphics. It can create data visualizations such as bar charts, pie charts, histograms, scatterplots, error charts, etc using high-level API. It also allows you to add different types of data visualization components or layers in a single visualization. To install ggplot2 the best method is to install the tidyverse using: R install.packages "tidyverse" Or you can install ggplot2 using: R install.packages "ggplot2" Example: We will be using 6 different data points for the bar plot and then with the help of the fill argument within the aes function, we will be applying the default colors to the barplot in the R programming language. R library "ggplot2" df filter species "Droid" Output: dplyr library 2. tidyr library 2. tidyr library tidyr is an essential data cleaning library in R that helps us create tidy data where each cell contains a single value, each column represents a variable and each row is an observation. This tidy data approach saves time by reducing the need for continuous cleaning and modifying tools to handle messy data. Tidyr functions fall into five main categories: Pivoting changing data between long and wide forms Nesting grouping data into a single row with a nested data frame Splitting

an observation. This tidy data approach saves time by reducing the need for continuous cleaning and modifying tools to handle messy data. Tidyr functions fall into five main categories: Pivoting changing data between long and wide forms Nesting grouping data into a single row with a nested data frame Splitting and Combining character columns Rectangling converting nested lists into tidy tibbles Handling missing values. To install tidyr, its best to install the tidyverse package using: R install.packages "tidyverse" Or you can install tidyr using: R install.packages "tidyr" Example : The gather function in tidr will take multiple columns and collapse them into key-value pairs, duplicating all other columns as needed. R library tidyr n 10 tidy_dataframe data.frame S.No c 1 : n , Group.1 c 23 , 345 , 76 , 212 , 88 , 199 , 72 , 35 , 90 , 265 , Group.2 c 117 , 89 , 66 , 334 , 90 , 101 , 178 , 233 , 45 , 200 , Group.3 c 29 , 101 , 239 , 289 , 176 , 320 , 89 , 109 , 199 , 56 head tidy_dataframe long gather Group , Frequency , Group.1 : Group.3 head long Output: tidyr library 3. Stringr library stringr is a library designed for data cleaning and preparation tasks, specifically focusing on string manipulation. Functions in stringr start with str and typically take a string vector as the first argument. Some common functions include str_detect, str_extract, str_match, str_count, str_replace and str_subset. To install stringr, its best to install the tidyverse using: R install.packages "tidyverse" Or you can install stringr like: R install.packages "stringr" Example : We are using the stringr package to calculate the length of the string GeeksforGeeks with the str_length function, which returns the number of characters in the string. R library stringr str_length "GeeksforGeeks" Output: 13 4. Forcats library forcats is an R library designed to handle issues related to factors or categorical variables which are vectors that can only take a predefined set of values. It helps manage tasks like reordering these vectors or adjusting the order of their levels. Some useful functions in forcats includes: fct_relevel which lets you manually reorder a vector fct_reorder which reorders a factor based on another variable fct_infreq which orders factors by their frequency. To install forcats, its best to install the tidyverse package using R install.packages "tidyverse" Or you can

of their levels. Some useful functions in forcats includes: fct_relevel which lets you manually reorder a vector fct_reorder which reorders a factor based on another variable fct_infreq which orders factors by their frequency. To install forcats, its best to install the tidyverse package using R install.packages "tidyverse" Or you can install forcats from using: R install.packages "forcats" Example: Below is a example of forecast library. R library forcats head starwars filter ! is.na species count species , sort TRUE Output: forcats library Data Import and Management in Tidyverse in R 1. readr library readr library provides a simple method to read rectangular data such as that with file formats tsv, csv, delim, fwf, etc. It can parse many different types of data using a function that parses the total file and another that focuses on the specific column. This column specification defines the method to convert the data in the column from a character vector to the data type that is most suited. This is done automatically by readr in most cases. readr can read different kinds of file formats using different functions namely read_csv for comma-separated files read_tsv for tab-separated files read_table for tabular files read_fwf for fixed-width files read_delim for delimited files read_log for web log files To install readr, the best method is to install the tidyverse using: R install.packages "tidyverse" Or you can install readr using: R install.packages "readr" . Example : We are using the readr package to read a tab-separated file geeksforgeeks.txt without column names using the read_tsv function. The data is stored in the variable myData and we print the content using print. R library readr myData read_tsv "geeksforgeeks.txt" , col_names FALSE print myData Output: A computer science portal for geeks. 2. tibble library A tibble is a form of a data.frame which includes the useful parts of it and discards the parts that are not so important. Tibbles dont change variables names or types like data.frames nor do they do partial matching but they bring problems to the forefront much sooner such as when a variable does not exist. Therefore a code with tibbles is effective which makes it compatible with larger datasets that contain more complex objects. It also has an enhanced print method. To install tibble the best method is to install the tidyverse using: R install.packages "tidyverse" Or you can install tibble using: R install.packages "tibble" Example : We

with tibbles is effective which makes it compatible with larger datasets that contain more complex objects. It also has an enhanced print method. To install tibble the best method is to install the tidyverse using: R install.packages "tidyverse" Or you can install tibble using: R install.packages "tibble" Example : We are using the tibble package to create a data frame named data with three columns: a , b and c . The column a contains numbers from 1 to 3, b contains the first three letters of the alphabet and c contains dates from the previous 3 days. We then print the data frame using print R library tibble data split . cyl map lm mpg wt , data . map summary map_dbl "r.squared" Output: purrr library In this article we explored Tidyverse packages in R which provide a cohesive set of tools for data science tasks from data import and cleaning to transformation, visualization and functional programming. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Data Munging in R Programming harkiran78 Follow Improve Article Tags : GBlog R Language

Complement Naive Bayes CNB Algorithm Last Updated : 10 Apr, 2023 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Naive Bayes algorithms are a group of very popular and commonly used Machine Learning algorithms used for classification. There are many different ways the Naive Bayes algorithm is implemented like Gaussian Naive Bayes, Multinomial Naive Bayes, etc. To learn more about the basics of Naive Bayes, you can follow this link. Complement Naive Bayes is somewhat an adaptation of the standard Multinomial Naive Bayes algorithm. Multinomial Naive Bayes does not perform very well on imbalanced datasets. Imbalanced datasets are datasets where the number of examples of some class is higher than the number of examples belonging to other classes. This means that the distribution of examples is not uniform. This type of dataset can be difficult to work with as a model may easily overfit this data in favor of the class with more number of examples. How CNB works: Complement Naive Bayes is particularly suited to work with imbalanced datasets. In complement Naive Bayes, instead of calculating the probability of an item belonging to a certain class, we calculate the probability of the item belonging to all the classes. This is the literal meaning of the word, complement and hence is called Complement Naive Bayes. A step-by-step high-level overview of the algorithm without any involved mathematics: For each class calculate the probability of the given instance not belonging to it. After calculation for all the classes, we check all the calculated values and select the smallest value. The smallest value lowest probability is selected because it is the lowest probability that it is NOT that particular class. This implies that it has the highest probability to actually belong to that class. So this class is selected. Note: We dont select the one with the highest value because we are calculating the complement of the probability. The one with the highest value is least likely to be the class that item belongs to. Now, let us consider an example: Say, we have two classes: Apples and Bananas and we have to classify whether a given sentence is related to apples or bananas, given the frequency of a certain number of words. Here is a tabular representation of the simple dataset: Sentence Number Round Red Long Yellow Soft Class 1 2 1 1 0 0 Apples 2 1 1 0 9 5

classify whether a given sentence is related to apples or bananas, given the frequency of a certain number of words. Here is a tabular representation of the simple dataset: Sentence Number Round Red Long Yellow Soft Class 1 2 1 1 0 0 Apples 2 1 1 0 9 5 Bananas 3 2 1 0 0 1 Apples Total word count in class Apples 211 211 8 Total word count in class Bananas 1 1 9 5 16 So, the Probability of a sentence to belong to the class, Apples, Similarly, the probability of a sentence to belong to the class, Bananas, In the above table, we have represented a dataset where the columns signify the frequency of words in a given sentence and then shows which class the sentence belongs to. Before we begin, you must first know about Bayes Theorem . Bayes Theorem is used to find the probability of an event, given that another event occurs. The formula is : where A and B are events, PA is the probability of occurrence of A, and PAB is the probability of A to occur given that event B has already occurred. PB, the probability of event B occurring cannot be 0 since it has already occurred. If you want to learn more about regular Naive Bayes and Bayes Theorem, you can follow this link. Now let us see how Naive Bayes and Complement Naive Bayes work. The regular Naive Bayes algorithm is, where f i is the frequency of some attribute. For example, the number of times certain words occur in a sentence. However, in complement naive Bayes, the formula is : If you take a closer look at the formulae, you will see that complement Naive Bayes is just the inverse of the regular Naive Bayes. In Naive Bayes, the class with the largest value obtained from the formula is the predicted class. So, since Complement Naive Bayes is just the inverse, the class with the smallest value obtained from the CNB formula is the predicted class. Now, let us take an example and try to predict it using our dataset and CNB, Round Red Long Yellow Soft Class 1 1 0 0 1 ? So, we need to find, and We need to compare both the values and select the class as the predicted class as the one with the smaller value. We have to do

it using our dataset and CNB, Round Red Long Yellow Soft Class 1 1 0 0 1 ? So, we need to find, and We need to compare both the values and select the class as the predicted class as the one with the smaller value. We have to do this also for bananas and pick the one with the smallest value. i.e., if the value for y Apples is smaller, the class is predicted as Apples, and if the value for y Bananas is smaller, the class is predicted as Bananas. Using the Complement Naive Bayes Formula for both the classes, Now, since 6.302 85.333, the predicted class is Apples . We DONT use the class with a higher value because a higher value means that it is more likely that a sentence with those words does NOT belong to the class. This is exactly why this algorithm is called Complement Naive Bayes. When to use CNB? When the dataset is imbalanced: If the dataset on which classification is to be done is imbalanced, Multinomial and Gaussian Naive Bayes may give a low accuracy. However, Complement Naive Bayes will perform quite well and will give relatively higher accuracy. For text classification tasks: Complement Naive Bayes outperforms both Gaussian Naive Bayes and Multinomial Naive Bayes in text classification tasks. Implementation of CNB in Python: For this example, we will use the wine dataset which is slightly imbalanced. It determines the origin of wine from various chemical parameters. To know more about this dataset, you can check this link. To evaluate our model, we will check the accuracy of the test set and the classification report of the classifier. We will use the scikit-learn library to implement the Complement Naive Bayes algorithm. Code: Import required modules from sklearn.datasets import load_wine from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split from sklearn.metrics import accuracy_score, classification_report from sklearn.naive_bayes import ComplementNB Loading the dataset dataset load_wine X dataset.data y dataset.target Splitting the data into train and test sets X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test train_test_splitX, y, test_size 0.15 , random_state 42 Creating and training the Complement Naive Bayes Classifier classifier ComplementNB classifier.fitX_train, y_train Evaluating the classifier prediction classifier.predictX_test prediction_train classifier.predictX_train print f "Training Set Accuracy : accuracy_scorey_train, prediction_train 100 n" print f "Test Set Accuracy : accuracy_scorey_test, prediction 100 nn" print f "Classifier Report : nn classification_reporty_test, prediction" OUTPUT Training Set Accuracy : 65.56291390728477 Test Set Accuracy : 66.66666666666666 Classifier Report

classifier.fitX_train, y_train Evaluating the classifier prediction classifier.predictX_test prediction_train classifier.predictX_train print f "Training Set Accuracy : accuracy_scorey_train, prediction_train 100 n" print f "Test Set Accuracy : accuracy_scorey_test, prediction 100 nn" print f "Classifier Report : nn classification_reporty_test, prediction" OUTPUT Training Set Accuracy : 65.56291390728477 Test Set Accuracy : 66.66666666666666 Classifier Report : precision recall f1-score support 0 0.64 1.00 0.78 9 1 0.67 0.73 0.70 11 2 1.00 0.14 0.25 7 accuracy 0.67 27 macro avg 0.77 0.62 0.58 27 weighted avg 0.75 0.67 0.61 27 We get an accuracy of 65.56 on the training set and an accuracy of 66.66 on the test set. They are pretty much the same and are actually quite good given the quality of the dataset. This dataset is notorious for being difficult to classify with simple classifiers like the one we have used here. So the accuracy is acceptable. Conclusion: Now that you know what Complement Naive Bayes classifiers are and how they work, next time you come across an unbalanced dataset, you can try using Complement Naive Bayes. References: scikit-learn documentation . Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Learn-One-Rule Algorithm alokesh985 Follow Improve Article Tags : AI-ML-DS Machine Learning python Practice Tags : Machine Learning python

Hinge-loss relationship with Support Vector Machines Last Updated : 07 Jun, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Here we will be discussing the role of Hinge loss in SVM hard margin and soft margin classifiers, understanding the optimization process, and kernel trick. Support Vector MachineSVM Support Vector MachineSVM is a supervised machine learning algorithm for classification and regression. Let us use the binary classification case to understand the Hinge loss. In the case of binary classification, the objective of SVM is to construct a hyperplane that divides the input data in such a way that all the data that belongs to class 1 lie on one side of the plane and all the data that belongs to class -1 lie on the other side of the plane. The objective function of the SVM classifier is for derivation please refer to the link of the SVM article shared above Minimize: frac12 w2 Subject to: yᵢ wxᵢ b 1 for all training examples xᵢ Here, "w" represents the weight vector of the hyperplane, "b" is the bias term, "xᵢ" are the training data points, and "yᵢ" is the class label of the data point either -1 or 1 for a binary classification problem. The objective is to minimize the L2-norm of the weight vector, which corresponds to maximizing the margin between the two classes. The inequality constraint yᵢ wxᵢ b 1 ensures that all data points are correctly classified, and those closest to the decision boundary support vectors satisfy the margin constraint. There are two types of SVM Hard Margin: Here we aim to classify all the points correctly. We assume the data is linearly separable by a hyperplane. Soft Margin: In the real world, the datasets are typically not linearly separable. In soft margin SVM we allow the model to misclassify some data points. We penalize the model for such misclassification . We will study hard margin and soft margin SVM in detail latter. Let us first understand hinge loss. Support Vector Machine Hinge Loss Hinge loss is used in binary classification problems where the objective is to separate the data points in two classes typically labeled as 1 and -1. Mathematically, Hinge loss for a data point can be represented as : Ly, fx max0, 1 - y fx Here, y- the actual class -1 or 1 fx - the output of the classifier for the datapoint

separate the data points in two classes typically labeled as 1 and -1. Mathematically, Hinge loss for a data point can be represented as : Ly, fx max0, 1 - y fx Here, y- the actual class -1 or 1 fx - the output of the classifier for the datapoint Lets understand it with the help of below graph Hinge Loss Case 1 : Correct Classification and y 1 In this case the product t.y will always be positive and its value greater than 1 and therefore the value of 1-t.y will be negative. So the loss function value max0,1-t.y will always be zero. This is indicated by the green region in above graph. Here there is no penalty to the model as model correctly classifies the data point. Case 2 : Correct Classification and y . - yᵢ wxᵢ b -1 0 to incorporate into the Lagrange equation. Summation is over all data points Compute the partial derivatives of the Lagrange function EQ1 with respect to w, b and λ i and set them to zero to find the critical points fracdldw w-λiyᵢ xᵢ 0 -------- Eq2 fracdldλ yᵢ wxᵢ b-1 0 -------- Eq3 fracdldb λiyi 0 -------- Eq4 For Eq2 we get w λiyᵢ xᵢ ------ Eq5 Substituting the value of w in form Eq5 into Eq1 Lw,b,λ frac12 iλiyᵢ x2 - jλjyj iλiyᵢ xᵢxj b jλj Lw,b,λ frac12 iλiyᵢx iλiyᵢ x - ijλiyᵢλjyj xᵢxj biλiyᵢ jλj ------ Eq6 The term biλiyᵢ 0 if we consider Eq4. Thus Eq 6 can be rearranged to Lw,b,λ jλj - frac12 ijλiyᵢλjyj xᵢxj Using the dual form we can write: Dλ maxλminw,b Lw,b,λ Sine we have obtaind Lw,b,λ in form of λ only we can simply write dual as Dλ maxλ jλj - 12 ijλiyᵢλjyj xᵢxj --------- EQ7 Thus we have converted our constrained optimization to unconstrained optimization . This is a special case of NON LINEAR PROGRAMMING known as QUADRATIC PROGRAMMING. Above maximization operation can be solved with the SMO sequential minimization optimization algorithms designed to solve the quadratic programming problem that arises when training a SVM. Understanding the Kernel Trick It may be possible that the data is not linearly seperable in the given dimension however it could be linearly separable in higher dimension. To find a hyperplane in higher dimension , one approaach would be we would need to covnert our data in n higher dimension and proceed

Trick It may be possible that the data is not linearly seperable in the given dimension however it could be linearly separable in higher dimension. To find a hyperplane in higher dimension , one approaach would be we would need to covnert our data in n higher dimension and proceed with our optimization process. However calculating features in higher dimension is computationally expensive. If we closely look at the equation 7 we observe that all we need is dot porduct of each observation with other observation and not the individual vector to solve our optimization problem. This fact is utilized in kernel trick. We use a kernel i.e. a function which takes two vector as input and gives us the inner product of the transformed feature vectors in the higher dimension space without explicitly calculating the individual features! Some commonly used kernls are Linear Kernel Polynomial Kernal RBF Kernal The choice of kernel function depends on the nature of the data and the problem at hand. SVMs with different kernels can capture different types of decision boundaries. For example, the RBF kernel is commonly used for capturing complex, nonlinear decision boundaries, while the linear kernel is suitable for linearly separable data. A hard margin is an idealized form of SVM which assumes perfect separability. However most datasets are not perfectly linearly separable. This is where Soft margin SVM comes. Support Vector in SVM Most of the lagrange multipliers will be zero except for those data points which lies on the boundary of margin plane. These vectors are called as support vectors as they guide the optimization since the hyperplane has to maximize the distance margin from these vectors. Hence the name support vector margins. Soft Margin and Hinge Loss Since many real practical dataset contains points that are not linealy seprable we need a plane that allows minimum misclassification of data points. For this we have Soft margin SVM. A soft margin SVM is an extension of hard marginv SVM that allows for some misclassification of data points withing the margin. The soft margin SVM can be mathematically represented as Minimize: frac12 w2 C Σ ϵi where yᵢ wxᵢ b 1 -ϵi Here we introduce slack variable ϵ i . if confidence score 1 if means the point is on wrong side of hyperplane C is a regularization parameter that balances the trade-off between maximizing the margin and minimizing classification

Minimize: frac12 w2 C Σ ϵi where yᵢ wxᵢ b 1 -ϵi Here we introduce slack variable ϵ i . if confidence score 1 if means the point is on wrong side of hyperplane C is a regularization parameter that balances the trade-off between maximizing the margin and minimizing classification errors. Here the hinge loss component, is part of the objective function itself through slack variable . It encourages the SVM to correctly classify or have a margin of at least 1 for each training data point. The term, frac12 w2 , encourages a simple and effective separating hyperplane. The SVM aims to find the optimal values of w and b that minimize this combined objective.C, which controls the trade-off between maximizing the margin and tolerating misclassification. If value of C 0 we effectively train hard margin classifier. The lagrange equation becomes: Lw,b,λ frac12 w2 - λiyᵢ wxᵢ b-1 ϵi This can be similarly solved using the method discussed in hard margin classifier. Implementing Hinge Loss Functions in Python We will use iris dataset to construct a SVM classifier using Hinge loss. The notebook is available at SVM Hinge Loss 1. Import Necessary Libraries Python from sklearn import datasets from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split from sklearn.metrics import confusion_matrix , precision_score , recall_score 2. Load the IRIS Dataset Python iris datasets . load_iris 3. Split in Train and Test Set Python X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test train_test_split iris 'data' , iris 'target' , test_size 0.33 , random_state 42 4. Model training using Hinge Loss We have imported SGD Classifier from scikit-learn and specified the loss function as 'hinge'. Model uses the training data and corresponding labels to classify data based on hinge loss function. Python Using hinge loss from sklearn.linear_model import SGDClassifier clf_hinge SGDClassifier loss "hinge" , max_iter 1000 clf_hinge . fit X_train , y_train y_test_pred_hinge clf_hinge . predict X_test 5. Model Evaluation when, loss 'hinge' Python print ' 033 1m' "Hinge Loss" ' 033 0m' print f "Precision score : precision_score y_test_pred_hinge , y_test , average 'weighted' " print f "Recall score : recall_score y_test_pred_hinge , y_test , average 'weighted' " print "Confusion Matrix" confusion_matrix y_test_pred_hinge , y_test Output : Hinge Loss Precision score : 0.95125 Recall score : 0.94 Confusion Matrix array19, 0, 0, 0, 15, 3, 0, 0, 13 Advantages of using hinge loss for SVMs There are several advantages to using hinge loss for SVMs: Hinge

'weighted' " print "Confusion Matrix" confusion_matrix y_test_pred_hinge , y_test Output : Hinge Loss Precision score : 0.95125 Recall score : 0.94 Confusion Matrix array19, 0, 0, 0, 15, 3, 0, 0, 13 Advantages of using hinge loss for SVMs There are several advantages to using hinge loss for SVMs: Hinge loss is a simple and efficient loss function to optimize. Hinge loss is robust to noise in the data. Hinge loss encourages SVMs to find hyperplanes with a large margin. Disadvantages of using hinge loss for SVMs There are a few disadvantages to using hinge loss for SVMs: Hinge loss is not differentiable at zero. This can make it difficult to optimize using some gradient-based methods. Hinge loss can be sensitive to outliers. Conclusion Hinge loss is a popular loss function for training SVMs. It is simple, efficient, and robust to noise in the data. However, it is not differentiable at zero and can be sensitive to outliers. Overall, hinge loss is a good choice for training SVMs for classification and regression tasks. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Optimal feature selection for Support Vector Machines R rahulsm27 Follow Improve Article Tags : Machine Learning Geeks Premier League AI-ML-DS Deep-Learning Geeks Premier League 2023 1 More Practice Tags : Machine Learning

Normal Distribution in R Last Updated : 04 Sep, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report In this article, we will discuss in detail the normal distribution and different types of built-in functions to generate normal distribution using R Programming Language . What is Normal Distribution in R? Normal Distribution in R is a probability function used in statistics that tells about how the data values are distributed. It is the most important probability distribution function used in statistics because of its advantages in real-case scenarios. For example, the height of the population, shoe size, IQ level, rolling a dice, and many more. It is generally observed that data distribution is normal when there is a random collection of data from independent sources. In R, there are 4 built-in functions to generate normal distribution: dnorm pnorm qnorm rnorm Now we will discuss all 4 built-in functions to generate normal distribution in detail using R Programming Language. 1: Genrate Normal Distribution using dnorm The dnorm function computes the density height of the probability density function at a given point for a normal distribution. normx, mean 0, sd 1, log FALSE Where, x: A vector of quantiles. mean: The mean of the distribution. sd: The standard deviation of the distribution. log: If TRUE, probabilities p are returned as logp. Lets perform one example to Genrate Normal Distribution using dnorm in R. R creating a sequence of values between -15 to 15 with a difference of 0.1 x seq -15 , 15 , by 0.1 y dnorm x , mean x , sd x output to be present as PNG file png file "dnormExample.png" Plot the graph. plot x , y saving the file dev.off Output: Normal Distribution in R 2: Genrate Normal Distribution using pnorm The pnorm function calculates the cumulative probability up to a given quantile. pnormq, mean 0, sd 1, lower.tail TRUE, log.p FALSE Where, q: A vector of quantiles. mean: The mean of the distribution. sd: The standard deviation of the distribution. lower.tail: If TRUE, probabilities are PX x; otherwise, PX x. log.p: If TRUE, probabilities p are returned as logp. Lets perform one example to Genrate Normal Distribution using pnorm in R. R creating a sequence of values between -10 to 10 with a difference of 0.1 x x. log.p: If TRUE, probabilities p are considered as logp. Lets perform one example to Genrate Normal Distribution

are returned as logp. Lets perform one example to Genrate Normal Distribution using pnorm in R. R creating a sequence of values between -10 to 10 with a difference of 0.1 x x. log.p: If TRUE, probabilities p are considered as logp. Lets perform one example to Genrate Normal Distribution using qnorm in R. R Create a sequence of probability values incrementing by 0.02. x - seq 0 , 1 , by 0.02 y - qnorm x , mean x , sd x output to be present as PNG file png file "qnormExample.png" Plot the graph. plot x , y Save the file. dev.off Output: Normal Distribution in R 4: Genrate Normal Distribution using r norm The rnorm function generates random numbers following a normal distribution. rnormn, mean 0, sd 1 n: Number of observations to generate. mean: The mean of the distribution. sd: The standard deviation of the distribution. Lets perform one example to Genrate Normal Distribution using qnorm in R. R Create a vector of 1000 random numbers with mean90 and sd5 x - rnorm 10000 , mean 90 , sd 5 output to be present as PNG file png file "rnormExample.png" Create the histogram with 50 bars hist x , breaks 50 Save the file. dev.off Output: Normal Distribution in R Conclusion The normal distribution is a crucial concept in statistics, with applications ranging from data analysis to inferential statistics. R provides a variety of functions dnorm , pnorm , qnorm , rnorm to work with normal distributions, making it easy to perform statistical analyses and generate visualizations. Understanding how to use these tools is essential for effective data analysis in R. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Binomial Distribution in R Programming utkarsh_kumar Follow Improve Article Tags : Data Science R Language data-science python Practice Tags : python

Call us at 91-9654847179 Connect with us 91-9654847179 Mail us at khushalgeeksforgeeks.org Copy to clipboard khushalgeeksforgeeks.org Copy to clipboard Thank You Your submission has been sent. Someone from our team will connect you soon! Contact Now Download Brochure Placement Training Program A B2B program that focuses on technical campus training to enable students to become interview ready and employable. Download Brochure Apply Now Assisting Campus Students The focus of this program is to equip students with industry-standard methodologies and knowledge to help them become job-ready. Interview Centric Skill Centric Basic Programming Features of this Program Our exclusive Placement Training Program is designed to provide the students of your college with the competitive edge they need in today's job market. Live classes by industry experts Students get to interact with industry professionals for expert guidance and advice Dedicated doubt assistance 24X7 Assistance by dedicated TAs ensure that students get personalized attention, feedback, and insights LMS with practice questions quiz Enhance learning through interactive practice and assessment with our learning management system Project centric learning Get a better understanding of how factual concepts are implemented in real-life scenarios Real-time interview centric contests Foster healthy competition among students through coding contests, encouraging them to enhance their problem-solving abilities and coding speed. An advantage to Campus Enrolling your campus for this program will help you strengthen your colleges reputation, demonstrate better results, build industry connections and help your students become future-technology ready. Performance Tracker Gain insights into your students' progress like never before. Stay informed about their quiz scores, project completion rates, and coding challenges to ensure personalized guidance and tailored support. Skill enhancement Through interactive learning, coding exercises, and hands-on projects, your campus will witness a significant boost in students' proficiency and their readiness to tackle real-world challenges. Hiring assistance From resume building workshops to interview preparation and connecting them with top-tier companies, our program ensures that your campus becomes a launchpad for professional success. Key account manager Our dedicated account manager serves as your direct point of contact, ensuring that your campus's unique needs are understood and catered to. Apply Now Placement Oriented Training Program Through this program, your campus ensures that students are not just academically strong, but also industry-ready. Our Placement Oriented Training Program is the bridge between classroom learning and professional success B2B Business This collaborative approach paves the way for a mutually beneficial relationship, enhancing your students' education

Oriented Training Program Through this program, your campus ensures that students are not just academically strong, but also industry-ready. Our Placement Oriented Training Program is the bridge between classroom learning and professional success B2B Business This collaborative approach paves the way for a mutually beneficial relationship, enhancing your students' education while contributing to your campus's growth. Upscale your Campus with GfG Elevate your campus's educational offerings by integrating GeeksforGeeks into your curriculum. Our comprehensive resources, expert guidance, and industry-aligned programs can add immense value to your campus's reputation Placement Centric We understand the significance of a strong foundation in technical and soft skills for securing job placements.With our Placement Centric offerings, your campus will become a launchpad for success! Affordable Prices We understand the budget constraints that institutions may face, which is why we have tailored our pricing to ensure that even the most cost-conscious campuses can benefit from our offerings. Our Partner Institutions We are already revolutionizing education and paving the way for brighter futures in these campuses. Your college can be the next! Certificate Get job-ready with affordable, career-aligned training programs taught by expert instructors from top companies and universities. Start pursuing your career dreams today with our program and get GeeksforGeeks certified Direct Call Testimonials Hear what our students say Find GeeksforGeeks alumni profiles and hear what they say about GeekforGeeks courses! Nikhil Isaac Geeks for Geeks' DSA course has been an absolute game-changer for my career. As an electronics engineering student aspiring to land an internship at a FAANG company, I knew I needed to strengthen my data structures and programming algorithms skills. This course provided the comprehensive and structured learning I was seeking Sarvesh Chavan The GFG DSA course exceeded my expectations. The content is well-structured, with clear explanations and relevant examples. Thank you GeeksforGeeks for amazing content. The interactive approach truly enhances learning. Overall, it's a great course for mastering Data Structures and Algorithms. Pranav Masekar The DSA course was comprehensive and well-structured, covering essential data structures and algorithms. The instructors provided clear explanations and practical examples, making it easy to understand and apply the concepts. The course greatly improved my problem-solving skills and prepared me for coding interviews. Highly recommended! Apoorva Chauhan I usually read from this app when I cannot use my laptop. Useful App to Learn DS Algo, Programming while travelling. It has access to all content I can read from

the concepts. The course greatly improved my problem-solving skills and prepared me for coding interviews. Highly recommended! Apoorva Chauhan I usually read from this app when I cannot use my laptop. Useful App to Learn DS Algo, Programming while travelling. It has access to all content I can read from my laptop and is.... Ajit Pawar I recently completed the online DSA Data Structures and Algorithms course, and I must say it was an exceptional learning experience. The course was well-structured, comprehensive, and delivered with utmost professionalism. I would like to express my sincere appreciation for the incredible effort put in by the instructors and the entire course team. Susmit Garudkar The course is very organised and i am able to learn and revised all the things that are needed for placements is efficient manne Pratiksha Kadam GeeksforGeeks have very helpful course for all the students who want to know about DSA in details Hiring assistance with GfG We collaborate closely with campuses to understand their unique needs, curricula, and student profiles. Leveraging our extensive industry network, we connect students with leading companies actively seeking fresh talent. GFG Recruitment Platform Empowering tech talent to connect with top companies and unlock their career potential Monthly Job-A-Thon Monthly hiring challenges providing access to multiple job openings via a single contest Job Fair Free job fair where hundreds of companies are invited with multiple job openings for students Placement Assistance Dedicated placement cell aimed at assisting students with their job applications process Learning Journey With us, the journey is just as rewarding as the destination! Have a look at what the students will experience- Training Program Access to Contests Access to Hiring Partners Start Here 01 Programming Languages 03 Live Sessions 05 Assessment Tests 07 Get a SDE Role 02 Data Structures Algorithms 04 Practice Questions 06 Placement Assistance Crack Interview Contact Us First Name Last Name Email Address Mobile Number Designation Institute This form is exclusively filled by the Training Placement Department or the Faculty Members of the College. Submit Frequently Asked Question Questions you might have about our products and services How would this training program be helpful in placements? This training program is designed in such a way that every candidate would be prepared on industry relevant requirements. Expert mentors would help each and every candidate and will ensure their learning curve is growing extensively. Who are eligible for this

How would this training program be helpful in placements? This training program is designed in such a way that every candidate would be prepared on industry relevant requirements. Expert mentors would help each and every candidate and will ensure their learning curve is growing extensively. Who are eligible for this training program? Students who wants to get into product based companies from 3rd Semester till 7th Semester and targeting software developer roles can be part of this training program. How is this training program is different? GeeksforGeeks offers lots of perks to the universities and institutions with this training program like: 247 Doubt Support, LIVE Classes from Industry Experts, LMS access to stakeholders for performance tracking, Placement Assistance etc. How the curriculum is designed for the training program? We design the curriculum according to the university or an individual institution requirement. Also, we provide our curriculum which is curated by industry experts and mentors. Do you provide certification to the students over the completion of this training program? Yes, GeeksforGeeks provides certification after the completion of the training program.

Difference between Angiosperms and Gymnosperms Last Updated : 15 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report All the species of plants come under the category of the plant kingdom. They consist of eukaryotic, multicellular, and autotrophic organisms. Autotrophs are those organisms that make their own food with the help of sunlight, water, soil, minerals, etc. Plants contain chloroplast and chlorophyll pigment, which is needed for photosynthesis. The process of making their own food is known as photosynthesis. Plants have distinct varieties with different characters. They cant displace. The plant kingdom plays a great role in society by providing information regarding its importance. R.H Whittaker gives 5 kingdom systems which he stated are kingdoms like Monera , Protista , Fungi , Animalia, and Plantae . Kingdom Plantae has mainly 5 groups, i.e., Algae , Bryophytes , Pteridophytes , Gymnosperms , and Angiosperms . Let us have a glance over the difference between gymnosperms and angiosperms. Gymnosperms The division Spermatophyta includes all seed-bearing plants. It has been branched into two subdivisions- Gymnosperms and Angiosperms. Gymnosperms are the most primitive group of seed plants, flourished in the Devonian period of the Palaeozoic era. The geological records show that they were ascendant plants over the earths surface during the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods of the Mesozoic era. There are about 70 genera and 725 species of living gymnosperms, spread across the temperate and tropical regions of the world. They even occur in arctic zones. Gymnosperms are woody plants that do not bear flowers. Seeds are exposed or nakedbetter adaptation for land habit. Fertilization is siphonogamous. Seeds are born on structures called cones. Due to the development of cambium, they show secondary growth . The members of numerous early groups of Gymnosperms e.g.. Cycadofilicales, Bennettitales, Cordaitales are extinct today and only their preserved remains fossils are known. Other groups like Cycadales, Ginkgoales, Coniferales, and Gnetales are represented by both living and fossil members. They are marked by the presence of naked ovules, unlike angiosperms, seeds of gymnosperms are not enclosed in ovaries. Gymnosperms are infrequently called Phanerogams without ovary. Angiosperms They are the most highly evolved plants. Flowering plants occur in most environments. Sea is the only exception. Here only one angiosperm is found. It is Zostera which thrives in shallow waters. They are most widespread in plains and hills. They have also been recorded in Antarctica and deserts. One species is

the most highly evolved plants. Flowering plants occur in most environments. Sea is the only exception. Here only one angiosperm is found. It is Zostera which thrives in shallow waters. They are most widespread in plains and hills. They have also been recorded in Antarctica and deserts. One species is reported to occur in hot springs at 60 C. A small orchid lives underground. Angiosperms are the most highly evolved plants. They are the most abundant and conspicuous plants. Range from tiny, almost microscopic Wolffia to tall trees of Eucalyptus. Pollination is through several agencies, but the most prominent is by animals. Anatomical Difference between Gymnosperms and Angiosperms Gymnosperms Living gymnosperms are mostly evergreen trees or shrubs with xerophytic adaptations. It has a Sporophytic plant body and is differentiated into roots, stems, and leaves. The well-developed tap root system is present. There is great diversity in both form and arrangement of leaves. The leaves are usually dimorphic. Leaves are generally spirally arranged. The roots are di- to polyarch. The young stem has a ring of collateral endarch and open vascular bundles. The wood may be manoxylic wood is sparse with wide parenchymatous rays, large pith, and cortex as in Cycas, or pycnoxylic wood dense or compact with small rays, and a small amount of cortex and pith as in Pinus. Venation may be parallel as in Welwitschia, reticulate as in Gnetum, dichotomous as in Gingko, or there may be a single vein as in most taxa. Xylem doesnt have vessels and phloem companion cells. Angiosperms Angiosperm sporophylls are aggregated to create flowers. A microsporophyll or stamen consists of a filament and an anther. A megasporophyll or carpel is rolled and partly sterilized to produce a stigma, style, and ovary. Plant embryos in seeds have structures, called cotyledons. Cotyledons are called seed leaves because in many cases they emerge and become green when the seed germinates. On the basis of the number of cotyledons, the angiosperms are divided into two groups: dicotyledons and monocotyledons. Secondary growth occurs in the stem and root of some angiosperms dicots. The xylem contains vessels. Phloem possesses sieve tubes and companion cells. Examples of Gymnosperms and Angiosperms Gymnosperms Gymnospermae includes the following two groups: Cycadae: Example- Cycas, Coniferae: Example- Pinus pines, Cedrusdeodar, Ginkgo, etc. Angiosperms Angiosperms are divided into two groups as follows: Monocotyledonae Monocots: Examples include Maize, wheat, rice, onion, barley, banana, Coconut, bamboo, and

possesses sieve tubes and companion cells. Examples of Gymnosperms and Angiosperms Gymnosperms Gymnospermae includes the following two groups: Cycadae: Example- Cycas, Coniferae: Example- Pinus pines, Cedrusdeodar, Ginkgo, etc. Angiosperms Angiosperms are divided into two groups as follows: Monocotyledonae Monocots: Examples include Maize, wheat, rice, onion, barley, banana, Coconut, bamboo, and grasses. DicotyledonaeDicots: Examples include peas, potatoes, sunflowers, roses, banyans, apples, etc. Uses of Gymnosperms and Angiosperms Gymnosperms Gymnosperms are used in the landscaping of parks and gardens because of their evergreen habit and evenly shaped appearance. The gymnosperm trees are used for timber, building construction, resin, and the manufacture of paper and board. They are also used in medicines, perfumes, varnishes, and essential oils. Various members of Cycadales are of considerable economic importanisGymnospermsce as Food, medicines, decorative plantations, and as green manure. Ginkgo biloba is grown as an avenue tree. Roasted seeds of Ginkgo are eaten at feasts in China and Japan to promote digestion and diminish the effects of drinking wine. Angiosperms Food: Angiosperms are used as cereals, pulses, fruits, nuts, and vegetables. Oils: Edible oils are obtained from groundnut, mustard, cottonseeds, sunflower, coconut, etc. Spices: They include cinnamon, cloves, chilies, and Coriander, and produce fennel. Beverages: Tea, coffee, and cocoa are got from flowering plants. Medicines: Some of them are aconite, belladonna, liquorice, etc. Timber: It is mostly obtained from dicots trees. The wood is called hardwood. General Difference between Angiosperms and Gymnosperms Parameter Angiosperms Gymnosperms Definition Angiosperms are Seed producing flowering plants whose seeds are enclosed within an ovary. Gymnospems are Seed producing non-flowering plants whose seeds are enclosed. Reproductive organs Archegoina are absent. The female gametophyte contains archegonia. Life cycle The seasonal lifecycle can be seen because these die during autumn. These plants are evergreen in nature. Embryo The embryo contains one or two cotyledons. The embryo may contain one to several cotyledons. Reproduction Animals depending reproduction for spread. Wind depends on reproduction. Tissue Triploid tissue. Haploid tissue. Leaves Flat-shaped leaves. Scale-like and needle-like leaves. Wood Hardwood Softwood Uses Used for food, clothing, etc. These are used for paper, lumber, etc. Differences in Reproductive Organs Gymnosperms Angiosperms The sporophylls are aggregated to form cones. The sporophylls are aggregated to form flowers. Cones are generally unisexual, rarely bisexual. Flowers are generally bisexual, rarely unisexual. Ovules are sessile. Ovules are borne on a stalk or funiculus. An ovule is covered by a 3-layered massive integument having a wide

Angiosperms The sporophylls are aggregated to form cones. The sporophylls are aggregated to form flowers. Cones are generally unisexual, rarely bisexual. Flowers are generally bisexual, rarely unisexual. Ovules are sessile. Ovules are borne on a stalk or funiculus. An ovule is covered by a 3-layered massive integument having a wide micropyle. It is covered by 1 or 2 thin integuments having a narrow micropyle. The female gametophyte contains archegonia. Archegonia are absent. Seeds develop exposure to megasporophyll. Fruits are never formed. Seeds develop inside the ovary which matures into a fruit. Male gametophyte contains 1 or 2 prothalial cells, a tuble cell a stalk cell,is and a body cell that divides to form 2 male gametes. Male gametophyte consists of a tube cell and a generative cell which divided to form two male gametes. Question 1: How do gymnosperms different from angiosperms? Answer: Gymnosperms are non-flowering plants, whereas angiosperms are flowering plants. Additionally, the seeds of gymnosperms are enclosed within an ovary and on the other hand, angiosperms have naked seeds. Question 2: Do angiosperms depend on water? Answer: No, angiosperms does not need water for fertilization. Question 3: Where do gymnosperms grow? Answer: Gymnosperms are often found in temperate forests and boreal forest biomes. Question 4: Which group is largest in gymnosperms? Answer: Conifers are the largest group of gymnosperms. Question 5: Why are angiosperms considered better than gymnosperms? Answer: The fruits aid in the dispersing of seeds on the other hand the flowers provide protection for the ovule. Hence, angiosperms are better than gymnosperms. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Animal Kingdom K khushbubhandari9 Follow Improve Article Tags : Class 11 School Biology School Learning Biology-Class-11 Plant-Physiology 1 More

Difference Between Cold Blooded And Warm-Blooded Animals Last Updated : 04 Oct, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report All humans, land mammals, aquatic animals, and birds have different physical characteristics that distinguish them depending on whether they are warm-blooded or cold-blooded animals. Warm-blooded animals are able to regulate their internal temperature according to the external temperature. On the other hand, cold-blooded animals cannot do this, which is why cold-blooded animals cannot survive extreme temperatures. Fish and reptiles are common examples of cold-blooded animals, while mammals are warm-blooded. Cold-Blooded Animals Animals are unable to regulate their core body temperature in response to changing environments. They often struggle to survive extreme temperature conditions. Examples include reptiles and fish. This applies to all living things except mammals and birds, including earthworms, fish, amphibians and reptiles. The term cold-blooded animal refers to an animal whose body temperature is approximately the same as that of its surroundings. A fish swimming in 40F water has a body temperature very close to 40F. In water at a temperature of 60F, the body temperature of the same fish is around 60F. Cold-blooded animals cannot heat themselves, so they must move their bodies to maintain their body temperature. Cold-blooded animals become less active when temperatures drop. When its too cold, an insects wing muscles cant move fast enough to fly. Some moths vibrate their wing muscles when they shake, and the contracting muscles generate enough heat to take off. Examples:- Reptiles, insects, fish, amphibians, etc. Warm-Blooded Animals Animals that are capable of regulating and maintaining a constant core body temperature are known as warm-blooded animals. Warm-blooded animals can adapt to the harsh conditions of any environment, maintain a constant core body temperature, and survive in any temperature range. Even in winter, warm-blooded animals can be as active as in summer, but they need plenty of food to keep warm. When the cold comes in winter, the body temperature of the birds is very high and it is difficult to get enough food. Examples include birds and mammals, including humans. The skin allows heat to escape from the body. In cold weather, layers of clothing can help people stay warm. Other mammals must rely on a layer of fat or fur to maintain their body temperature and protect themselves from the cold. Mammals with large ears and long tails are not found in very cold regions. To

the body. In cold weather, layers of clothing can help people stay warm. Other mammals must rely on a layer of fat or fur to maintain their body temperature and protect themselves from the cold. Mammals with large ears and long tails are not found in very cold regions. To replace the heat lost on this huge area would require a lot of extra food, which is hard to come by. Examples:- Birds and mammals Differences Between Cold-Blooded And Warm-Blooded Animals Cold-Blooded Warm-Blooded They can maintain a constant temperature They cannot maintain a constant temperature They obtain energy from the surrounding environment. They obtain energy from food consumption Their body temperatures varies with surrounding Their body temperature lie between 35 to 40 celsius They changes their rate of metabolism with change in the environment Environmental change does not affect their metabolism They cannot withstand extreme temperatures They can maintain a constant body temperature. Examples:- Reptiles, insects, fish, amphibians, etc Example- Birds and mammals Similarities Between Warm-Blooded and Cold-Blooded Animals There are not many notable between warm-blooded and cold-blooded animals but Rodents possess characteristics of both warm-blooded and cold-blooded animals. As they can adjust their body temperature to match the surrounding air just like cold-blooded animals, such species are also referred to as heterotrophs. Conclusion Cold-blooded animals are animals that cannot generate their own body temperature and must rely on the environment to regulate their body temperature. Warm-blooded animals are animals that can generate their own body temperature and do not need to depend on the environment to regulate body temperature. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Difference Between Blood And Lymph 507akhitqcq Follow Improve Article Tags : Difference Between School Biology Biology-Difference-Between Versus

Similar Topics DSA 22.3k articles Python Programs 4.1k articles Python-gui 2.5k articles Python-PyQt 1.7k articles Python-pandas 1.6k articles Python list-programs 1.6k articles Python-numpy 1.3k articles Python-matplotlib 1k articles python-utility 660 articles Python dictionary-programs 570 articles Programming Language Python Python 20.8k posts Popular Articles Recent Articles Python Programs Last Updated: 27 December 2024 Practice with Python program examples is always a good choice to scale up your logical understanding and programming skills and this article ...read more Python Python Programs Tutorials Python Tutorial Learn Python Programming Language Last Updated: 03 May 2025 Python Tutorial Python is one of the most popular programming languages. Its simple to use, packed with features and supported by a w ...read more Python Python Programs python Tutorials How to Install PIP on Windows Last Updated: 25 February 2025 PIP stands for "Preferred Installer Program" or "Pip Installs Packages" and is a standard package manager for Python that enables users to ...read more Python C-Misc C QA - Placement Quizzes-Data Interpretation JP Morgan python-basics TCS-coding-questions How To Installation Guide how-to-install Intellipaat Similar Topics DSA 22.3k articles Python Programs 4.1k articles Python-gui 2.5k articles Python-PyQt 1.7k articles Python-pandas 1.6k articles Python list-programs 1.6k articles Python-numpy 1.3k articles Python-matplotlib 1k articles python-utility 660 articles Python dictionary-programs 570 articles Read JSON file using Python Last Updated: 02 April 2025 The full form of JSON is JavaScript Object Notation. It means that a script executable file which is made of text in a programming languag ...read more Technical Scripter Python Picked Python-json Technical Scripter 2019 Spotlight Read a file line by line in Python Last Updated: 02 January 2025 Python provides built-in functions for creating, writing, and reading files. Two types of files can be handled in Python, normal text files ...read more Python python-file-handling Taking input in Python Last Updated: 02 January 2025 Developers often have a need to interact with users, either to get data or to provide some sort of result. Most programs today use a dialog ...read more Python How to Get Column Names in Pandas Dataframe Last Updated: 18 April 2025 While analyzing the real datasets which are often very huge in size, we might need to get the pandas column names in order to perform certai ...read more Python Python-pandas Python pandas-dataFrame pandas-dataframe-program AI-ML-DS Iterate over a list in Python Last Updated: 02 January 2025 Python provides several ways to iterate over list. The simplest

which are often very huge in size, we might need to get the pandas column names in order to perform certai ...read more Python Python-pandas Python pandas-dataFrame pandas-dataframe-program AI-ML-DS Iterate over a list in Python Last Updated: 02 January 2025 Python provides several ways to iterate over list. The simplest and the most common way to iterate over a list is to use a for loop. This me ...read more Python python-list Picked Python list-programs Different ways to create Pandas Dataframe Last Updated: 02 January 2025 It is the most commonly used Pandas object.The pd.DataFrame function is used to create a DataFrame in Pandas. There are several ways to cr ...read more Python Picked Python-pandas Python pandas-dataFrame AI-ML-DS Python Lists Last Updated: 11 March 2025 In Python, a list is a built-in dynamic sized array automatically grows and shrinks. We can store all types of items including another li ...read more Python python-list Dictionaries in Python Last Updated: 12 February 2025 A Python dictionary is a data structure that stores the value in key: value pairs. Values in a dictionary can be of any data type and can be ...read more Python python-dict Python String replace Method Last Updated: 28 October 2024 The replace method replaces all occurrences of a specified substring in a string and returns a new string without modifying the original s ...read more Python python-string Python map function Last Updated: 23 October 2024 The map function is used to apply a given function to every item of an iterable, such as a list or tuple, and returns a map object which ...read more Python python-list python-map python-list-functions Enumerate in Python Last Updated: 20 January 2025 enumerate function adds a counter to each item in a list or other iterable. It turns the iterable into something we can loop through, wher ...read more Python Python-Built-in-functions Reading and Writing to text files in Python Last Updated: 02 January 2025 Python provides built-in functions for creating, writing, and reading files. Two types of files can be handled in Python, normal text files ...read more Technical Scripter Python python-file-handling 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Last 1 2 3 4 5 6 Last 1 2 3 4 Last

Similar Topics School Learning 11.6k articles Difference Between 4.2k articles School Biology 1.9k articles Versus 280 articles Human-Physiology 250 articles Plant-Physiology 170 articles Ecology 160 articles Cell-Biology 130 articles Botany 110 articles Animal-Physiology 110 articles Biology-Difference-Between 160 posts Popular Articles Recent Articles Difference Between Aardvarks and Anteaters Last Updated: 07 October 2023 Aardvarks and Anteaters may seem similar at first sight but they belong to different continents and have different characteristics. Aardvark ...read more Difference Between Picked School Biology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Food Chain and Food Web Last Updated: 22 April 2025 The difference between a food chain and a food web lies in their complexity and structure. The Food chain and food web both represent the fl ...read more Picked School Learning School Biology Ecology Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Test E And Test C Last Updated: 24 August 2023 Test E and Test C often referred to as Testosterone Enanthate and Testosterone Cypionate respectively, are two popular forms of testosterone ...read more Difference Between Picked School Biology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Similar Topics School Learning 11.6k articles Difference Between 4.2k articles School Biology 1.9k articles Versus 280 articles Human-Physiology 250 articles Plant-Physiology 170 articles Ecology 160 articles Cell-Biology 130 articles Botany 110 articles Animal-Physiology 110 articles Difference Between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Replication Last Updated: 03 May 2024 Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic replication differs a lot in terms of location, accuracy, time taken, enzymes used, etc. The major difference bet ...read more Difference Between Picked School Learning School Biology Molecular Biology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Sympathetic And Parasympathetic Last Updated: 10 October 2023 The Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Nervous Systems are a part of the Autonomic Nervous System ANS present in the human body. The ANS regu ...read more Picked School Learning School Biology Human-Physiology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Alpha, Beta and Gamma Hemolysis Last Updated: 16 September 2024 Bacteria can break open red blood cells in three ways when grown on a special type of plate called a blood agar plate: alpha, beta, and gamm ...read more Difference Between Picked School Biology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Rice and Wheat Last Updated: 10 April 2023 Both rice and wheat are members of the cereal group, and both are scientific names is that wheat Triticum spp. and rice Oryza sativa. Ri ...read more Picked School Learning School Biology Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Cytosol And Cytoplasm Last Updated: 27 March 2023 Cells are the basic unit of

2023 Both rice and wheat are members of the cereal group, and both are scientific names is that wheat Triticum spp. and rice Oryza sativa. Ri ...read more Picked School Learning School Biology Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Cytosol And Cytoplasm Last Updated: 27 March 2023 Cells are the basic unit of life in all organisms. Cytoplasm and cytoplasm are two components of the cell. Cytosol is the intracellular flui ...read more Difference Between Picked School Biology Cell-Biology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between DNA and RNA Last Updated: 15 February 2024 The difference Between DNA and RNA lies in their structure, function, and location within cells, with DNA typically double-stranded, storing ...read more Difference Between Picked School Biology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Purines and Pyrimidines Last Updated: 07 March 2024 Purines and pyrimidines are the two types of nitrogenous bases that make up the building blocks of DNA and RNA. These bases are responsible ...read more Difference Between Picked School Learning School Biology Molecular Biology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Photosynthesis And Respiration Last Updated: 15 March 2023 The main difference between photosynthesis and respiration is: Photosynthesis is the process of converting light energy into chemical energy ...read more Difference Between Picked School Biology Plant-Physiology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference between Pneumothorax and Tension Pneumothorax Last Updated: 15 April 2025 Pneumothorax and Pneumothorax Tension are the two medical terms that affect the lungs and cause severe breathing problems. Both these proble ...read more Difference Between Picked School Biology Human-Physiology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Keratinized and Non-Keratinized Epithelium Last Updated: 13 March 2023 The epithelium is a type of tissue that forms the outer layer of the body and helps to protect the underlying tissues from damage and injury ...read more Difference Between Picked School Biology Human-Physiology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Cold Blooded And Warm-Blooded Animals Last Updated: 04 October 2024 All humans, land mammals, aquatic animals, and birds have different physical characteristics that distinguish them depending on whether they ...read more Difference Between Picked School Biology Versus Biology-Difference-Between Difference Between Renewable And Non-Renewable Resources Last Updated: 09 April 2025 The difference between Renewable and Non-Renewable resources is that the former can be replenished whereas the latter cannot. Renewable and ...read more Picked School Learning School Biology Ecology Versus Biology-Difference-Between 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Last 1 2 3 4 5 6 Last 1 2 3 4 Last

Similar Topics Python 20.1k articles Python-PyQt 1.7k articles Python PyQt-SpinBox 290 articles Python PyQt5-ComboBox 260 articles Python-wxPython 240 articles Python PyQt-QCalendarWidget 240 articles Python-PyQtGraph 220 articles Python-Pyglet 190 articles Python PyQt5-ComboBox-stylesheet 180 articles Python-kivy 90 articles Python-gui 2.5k posts Popular Articles Recent Articles What is Tkinter for Python? Last Updated: 24 April 2024 Tkinter is a standard Python GUI Graphical User Interface library that provides a set of tools and widgets to create desktop applications ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Progress Bars in Python Last Updated: 25 April 2025 Understandably, we get a little impatient when we do not know how much time a process is going to take, for example, a for loop or a file do ...read more Python Python Programs Python-gui Python Tkinter - Label Last Updated: 01 May 2024 Tkinter Label is a widget that is used to implement display boxes where you can place text or images. The text displayed by this widget can ...read more Python Picked Python-tkinter Python-gui Python Tkinter Widget Similar Topics Python 20.1k articles Python-PyQt 1.7k articles Python PyQt-SpinBox 290 articles Python PyQt5-ComboBox 260 articles Python-wxPython 240 articles Python PyQt-QCalendarWidget 240 articles Python-PyQtGraph 220 articles Python-Pyglet 190 articles Python PyQt5-ComboBox-stylesheet 180 articles Python-kivy 90 articles Python Tkinter - Frame Widget Last Updated: 01 May 2024 Python offers multiple options for developing GUI Graphical User Interface. Out of all the GUI methods, Tkinter is the most commonly used ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Python Tkinter - Entry Widget Last Updated: 21 August 2024 Python offers multiple options for developing a GUI Graphical User Interface. Out of all the GUI methods, Tkinter is the most commonly use ...read more Python Picked Python-tkinter Python-gui Python Tkinter Widget Kivy Tutorial Last Updated: 17 July 2023 Kivy is an opensource Python library that allows you to develop multi-platform graphical user interface applications on Windows, macOS, Andr ...read more Python Python-gui Python-kivy Python grid method in Tkinter Last Updated: 21 August 2024 The Grid geometry manager puts the widgets in a 2-dimensional table. The master widget is split into a number of rows and columns, and each ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Python pack method in Tkinter Last Updated: 22 February 2022 The Pack geometry manager packs widgets relative to the earlier widget. Tkinter literally packs all the widgets one after the other in a win ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui RadioButton in Tkinter Python Last Updated:

...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Python pack method in Tkinter Last Updated: 22 February 2022 The Pack geometry manager packs widgets relative to the earlier widget. Tkinter literally packs all the widgets one after the other in a win ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui RadioButton in Tkinter Python Last Updated: 16 February 2021 The Radiobutton is a standard Tkinter widget used to implement one-of-many selections. Radiobuttons can contain text or images, and you can ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Python Tkinter Widget Python Add image on a Tkinter button Last Updated: 25 April 2019 Tkinter is a Python module which is used to create GUI Graphical User Interface applications with the help of varieties of widgets and fun ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Python Create a digital clock using Tkinter Last Updated: 28 November 2024 As we know Tkinter is used to create a variety of GUI Graphical User Interface applications. In this article we will learn how to create a ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Python after method in Tkinter Last Updated: 16 June 2021 Tkinter provides a variety of built-in functions develop interactive and featured GUI Graphical User Interface. after function is also a ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Geometry Method in Python Tkinter Last Updated: 28 April 2025 Tkinter is a built-in Python module used for building desktop GUI applications. It's simple, powerful, and doesnt require any external in ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Python Binding function in Tkinter Last Updated: 10 May 2022 Tkinter is a GUI Graphical User Interface module that is widely used in desktop applications. It comes along with the Python, but you can ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Python Tkinter - Create Button Widget Last Updated: 14 August 2024 The Tkinter Button widget is a graphical control element used in Python's Tkinter library to create clickable buttons in a graphical user in ...read more Python Python-tkinter Python-gui Python Tkinter Widget 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Last 1 2 3 4 5 6 Last 1 2 3 4 Last

Binomial Nomenclature Definition, Rules, Classification and Examples Last Updated : 28 Aug, 2023 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Binomial Nomenclature is the protocol of naming species in biology using a scientific two-part name, consisting of the genus and the species name. The binomial nomenclature system was introduced by the Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus in the 18th century and it is still used. Binomial nomenclature is based on the hierarchical classification system known as taxonomy, Nomenclature, in biological classification, is a system of naming organisms. What is Binomial Nomenclature? Binomial Nomenclature was given by Carl Linnaues. Different local names are given to specific organisms or plant which make it hard to identify globally. Various names of an organism make a lot of confusion. So to get rid of this confusion scientists came up with this standard protocol. According to this, each organism would have one scientific name. This making process is known as Binomial Nomenclature . All living species including plants, animals, birds, and some microbes have their scientific names. For eg., The scientific name of the tiger is presented as Panthera tigris. Panthera represents the genus and Tigris represents a particular species or specific epithet. The scientific name of humans is presented as Homo sapiens. Homo represents the genus and sapiens represents a particular species. Rules of Binomial Nomenclature Today all over the world all scientists follow the same set of taxonomy for naming organisms. 2 different international codes are present which are agreed upon by all scientists all over the world. The International Code of Botanical Nomenclature ICBN: ICBN with the biological nomenclature of plants. The International Code of Zoological Nomenclature ICZN: ICZN with the biological nomenclature of animals. both codes make sure that each organism gets a specific name. The naming follows certain conventions. Each scientific name has two parts Generic name Specific epithet All the scientific names of organisms are usually Latin. Hence, they are written in italics. Two parts to a name of an organism exist. The first word identifies the genus and the second word identifies the species. When the names are handwritten, they are underlined or italicized if typed. This is done to specify its Latin origin. The name of the genus starts with a capital letter and the name of the species starts with a small letter. Why is Binomial Nomenclature Important? There are millions of species of organisms present

handwritten, they are underlined or italicized if typed. This is done to specify its Latin origin. The name of the genus starts with a capital letter and the name of the species starts with a small letter. Why is Binomial Nomenclature Important? There are millions of species of organisms present throughout the world. The same organisms are known by various names around the world and this can confuse when trying to identify or classify them. Binomial nomenclature was seen as a viable solution to this problem. Drawbacks of Binomial Nomenclature Following are the primary drawbacks of binomial nomenclature are: If two or more names are currently in use, according to the law of priority, the correct name will be the one used first and the others end up being synonyms as validity is the senior synonym. Providing stability in the naming and classification of organisms must be emphasized. The names used before those included in the Systema Naturae, by Linnaeus are not recognized. Binominal nomenclature is the system of naming species of living organisms using two words, a genus name followed by a species name. For Example: Magnifera Indica is the Binominal Nomenclature of Mango. 2. Who coined taxonomy? Answer: A.P.de Candolle coined taxonomy. 3. What is binomial nomenclature? Answer: Binomial Nomenclature is the system of naming in which the scientific name of an organism has two components, i.e., genus and species. 4. Who is the father of binomial nomenclature? Answer: Carl Linnaeus is the father of binomial nomenclature. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Taxonomic Hierarchy In Biological Classification C chaitanyatejodr1 Follow Improve Article Tags : Class 11 School Biology School Learning

Enzymes Definition, Structure, Classification, Examples Last Updated : 26 Apr, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Enzymes are biological molecules that act as catalysts, speeding up chemical responses in living organisms. They work by lowering the activation energy needed for a response to do, therefore adding the rate of the response without being consumed themselves. Enzymes play pivotal places in colorful natural processes, similar as metabolism, digestion, and cell signaling. Table of Content Enzymes Structure of Enzyme Classification of Enzymes Enzyme Cofactor Mechanism of Enzyme Action Enzymes as Biochemical Catalysts Examples of Enzyme Catalysis Factors Affecting Enzyme Catalysis Drug Action of Enzymes Examples of Enzymes Chemical Nature of Enzyme Enzymes Enzymes are nitrogenous organic molecules produced by living organisms such as plants and animals. A long chain of one or more amino acids is connected together using amide or peptide bonds to make them. They are high-molecular-mass proteins that catalyse natural processes in the bodies of animals and plants. They are also known as polypeptides. Enzymes are categorised into distinct categories based on their structure and properties. Enzymes have a specific method of action Lock-and-Key mechanism and Enzyme Fit Hypothesis . Structure of Enzyme Enzymes are proteins that are made up of several polypeptide chains, also known as amino acids, that have been folded and coiled numerous times. They have linear chains of amino acids in three-dimensional structures. The enzymes catalytic activity is determined by the amino acid sequence. Only a small portion of an enzymes structure participates in catalysis and is located around the binding sites. They have separate sites; the active site of an enzyme is made up of the catalytic and binding sites. Classification of Enzymes The International Union of Biochemists divides enzymes into six types based on the sort of reaction they catalyse I U B. Oxidoreductases, transferases, hydrolases, lyases, ligases, and isomerases are the six types of enzyme s. The following are their functions: Oxidoreductases: Oxidoreductase is an enzyme that catalyses the oxidation and reduction reactions in which electrons are transferred from one form of a molecule electron donor to the other electron acceptor. Consider the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase. Cofactors for oxidoreductase enzymes are commonly NADP or NAD. AH 2 BABH 2 Transferases: These catalyse the transfer of a chemical group functional group from one compound referred to as the donor to another compound referred to as the recipient called the acceptor.

electron acceptor. Consider the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase. Cofactors for oxidoreductase enzymes are commonly NADP or NAD. AH 2 BABH 2 Transferases: These catalyse the transfer of a chemical group functional group from one compound referred to as the donor to another compound referred to as the recipient called the acceptor. A transaminase, for example, is an enzyme that transfers an amino group from one molecule to another. AXBBXA Hydrolases: They are hydrolytic enzymes that catalyse the hydrolysis reaction by cleaving the bond and hydrolyzing it with water molecules, i.e. they catalyse the hydrolysis of a bond. Pepsin, for example, breaks down peptide connections in proteins. AXH 2 OXOHAH Lyases: They are enzymes that catalyse bodywork by creating a double bond or adding a group to a double bond without involving hydrolysis or oxidation. Aldolase a glycolysis enzyme catalyses the conversion of fructose-1, 6-bisphosphate to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate, for example. AXBYABXY Isomerases: Theyre an enzyme family that converts a chemical from one isomer to another. Isomerases aid intramolecular rearrangements by breaking as well as forming bonds. In glycogenolysis, for example, phosphoglucomutase catalyses the conversion of glucose-1-phosphate to glucose-6-phosphate the phosphate group is moved from one position to another in the same substance. For energy to be released fast, glycogen is converted to glucose. A Cis A Trans Ligases: Ligase is a catalytic enzyme that catalyses the ligation or connecting of two big molecules by establishing a new chemical link between them. DNA ligase, for example, catalyses the formation of a phosphodiester bond between two DNA fragments. ABAB Enzyme Cofactor Cofactors are chemical substances that are not proteins and are found in enzymes. A cofactor affects the action of an enzyme by acting as a catalyst. Apoenzymes are enzymes that do not require a cofactor. The holoenzyme is made up of an enzyme and its cofactor. Three Kinds of Cofactors Present in Enzymes: Prosthetic groups: These are cofactors that are always covalently or permanently linked to an enzyme. Many enzymes have a FAD Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide prosthetic group. Coenzyme: A coenzyme is a non-protein organic molecule that only interacts to an enzyme during catalysis. It is separated from the enzyme at all other times. NAD is a widely used coenzyme. Metal ions: Certain enzymes require a metal ion in the active site to establish coordinate bonds during catalysis. A number of enzymes use the metal ion cofactor Zn 2 . Check:

enzyme during catalysis. It is separated from the enzyme at all other times. NAD is a widely used coenzyme. Metal ions: Certain enzymes require a metal ion in the active site to establish coordinate bonds during catalysis. A number of enzymes use the metal ion cofactor Zn 2 . Check: Nature of Enzyme Action Mechanism of Enzyme Action The active site of an enzyme draws substrates and catalyses the chemical process that produces products. Allows the products to disassociate or detach from the enzymes surface after product production. The enzyme-substrate complex is the combination of an enzyme and its substrates. The reaction requires the collision of any two molecules, as well as the correct orientation and a sufficient quantity of energy. This energy must be transferred between these molecules in order to overcome the reactions Activation Energy barrier. Without any catalysts, the substrate and enzyme produce an intermediate reaction with low activation energy. Two of the most well-known mechanisms of enzyme function are the Induced Fit Hypothesis and the Lock and Key Mechanism. Induced Fit Hypothesis: In 1958, Daniel Koshland proposed the induced fit model. One of the most common models for characterising the enzyme-substrate interaction is this one. The active site of the enzyme, according to the idea, does not have a firm shape. As a result, the substrate does not completely fit into the enzymes active site. As a result, when the enzyme binds to the substrate, the active site changes form, becoming complementary to the substrates shape. Because of the flexibility of the protein, this conformational shift is possible. Lock and Key Mechanism: Emil Fischer proposed the lock and key concept in 1894, and it is now known as Fishers theory, which describes the enzyme-substrate interaction. Emil Fischer proposed the lock and key model in 1894. As a result, its sometimes referred to as Fishers theory. The enzyme-substrate interaction is described by the second model. The enzymes active site functions as the lock, while its substrate serves as the key, according to the lock and key concept. As a result, the form of the enzymes active site complements the shape of the substrate. By generating an useless intermediate product, the enzyme-substrate complex, the active site of the enzyme can hold the substrate closer to the enzyme. Check: Mechanism of Enzymes Action Enzymes as Biochemical Catalysts Biochemical catalysts are also known as enzymes, and the phenomenon is known

complements the shape of the substrate. By generating an useless intermediate product, the enzyme-substrate complex, the active site of the enzyme can hold the substrate closer to the enzyme. Check: Mechanism of Enzymes Action Enzymes as Biochemical Catalysts Biochemical catalysts are also known as enzymes, and the phenomenon is known as biochemical catalysis. Enzymes are widely used to enhance or expedite the efficient preparation and effect of beverages, chocolates, curd, predigested infant food, washing powders, and other products. Examples of Enzyme Catalysis Cane sugar inversion: Cane sugar is converted to glucose and fructose by the enzyme invertase. C 12 H 22 O 11 aqH 2 O1 C 6 H 12 O 6 aq C 6 H 12 O 6 aq Conversion of milk to curd: The enzyme lactase, which is released by lactobacilli, is responsible for turning milk into curd. Conversion of glucose into ethyl alcohol: Glucose is converted to ethyl alcohol and carbon dioxide by the zymase enzyme. C 6 H 12 O 6 aq 2C 2 H 5 OHaq 2CO 2 aq Conversion of starch into maltose: Starch is converted to maltose by the diastase enzyme. Factors Affecting Enzyme Catalysis Concentration of Substrate: In the presence of an enzyme, the rate of a chemical reaction increases as the substrate concentration rises until a limiting rate is achieved, after which additional increases in the substrate concentration have no effect on the reaction. The enzyme molecules are saturated with the substrate at this point. The extra substrate molecules are unable to react until the substrate that has already been bound to the enzymes has reacted and been released. Concentration of Enzyme: When the enzyme concentration is much lower than the substrate concentration, the rate of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction is proportional to the enzyme concentration. This is true for any catalyst; when the catalyst concentration rises, the reaction rate rises as well. Temperature: For most chemical reactions, a temperature increase of 10C about doubles the reaction rate, according to a well-known rule of thumb. This rule applies to all enzymatic reactions to some extent. Even a slight increase in temperature, after a certain threshold, induces denaturation of the protein structure and disruption of the active site, resulting in a drop in reaction rate. Hydrogen Ion Concentration pH: Most enzymes are proteins, and they are sensitive to variations in pH or hydrogen ion concentration. The degree of ionisation of an enzymes acidic

a certain threshold, induces denaturation of the protein structure and disruption of the active site, resulting in a drop in reaction rate. Hydrogen Ion Concentration pH: Most enzymes are proteins, and they are sensitive to variations in pH or hydrogen ion concentration. The degree of ionisation of an enzymes acidic and basic side groups, as well as the substrate components, is affected by changes in pH. The catalytic activity of an enzyme is altered when one of these charges is neutralised. Over a narrow pH range, an enzymes activity is at its peak. The enzymes optimal pH is determined by the median value of this pH range. Inhibition of Enzymes: Enzymes must occasionally be slowed to aid and ensure that our bodies systems operate appropriately and efficiently. For example, if an enzyme produces too much of a product, it must be possible to reduce or stop production. Inhibitors are required in such situations. Enzymes Inhibition: A molecule blocks the active site, causing the substrate to compete with the inhibitor for binding to the enzyme. Non-competitive inhibitors bind to an enzyme in a location other than the active site, reducing its effectiveness. Inhibitors that bind to the enzyme-substrate complex are known as noncompetitive inhibitors. The products exit the active site with less ease, slowing the reaction. Irreversible inhibitors bind to an enzyme and render it inactive for the rest of its life. Drug Action of Enzymes Drugs that act on the active sites of enzymes can control, i.e. inhibit or stimulate, enzyme function. The majority of medications that act on enzymes are inhibitors, and the majority of them are competitive inhibitors, meaning they compete with the enzymes substrate for binding. The bulk of the original first generation kinase inhibitors, for example, bind to the enzymes ATP pocket. Examples of Enzymes Lipases are a group of enzymes that aid in the digestion of lipids in the intestine. Amylase is a protein that aids in the conversion of carbohydrates to sugars. Saliva contains this enzyme. Maltase is a sugar that breaks down maltose into glucose and is found in saliva. Maltose can be found in a variety of foods, including potatoes, pasta, and beer. Trypsin is an enzyme that breaks down proteins into amino acids and is located in the small intestine. Lactase is an enzyme present in the small intestine that aids in the breakdown of lactose, a sugar found in milk,

found in a variety of foods, including potatoes, pasta, and beer. Trypsin is an enzyme that breaks down proteins into amino acids and is located in the small intestine. Lactase is an enzyme present in the small intestine that aids in the breakdown of lactose, a sugar found in milk, into glucose and galactose. Helicase is a DNA unravelling enzyme. DNA Polymerase is a type of enzyme that makes DNA from deoxyribonucleotides. Check: Classification of Drugs Chemical Nature of Enzyme Enzymes are primarily composed of proteins. Proteins are made up of chains of amino acids. Amino acids are folded into specific three-dimensional shapes, determining the enzymes structure. The structure includes an active site where the substrate binds and catalytic reactions occur. Enzymes can also be RNA molecules, although less common than protein enzymes. The sequence and structure of amino acids in enzymes dictate their function and specificity for particular substrates. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Classification of Vitamins amanarora3dec Follow Improve Article Tags : Class 12 School Chemistry School Learning Chemistry-Class-12

Social Science: Meaning, Branches, Resources Last Updated : 21 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Social Science is a broad field of study that covers a wide range of disciplines, including anthropology, economics, geography, history, political science, psychology, and sociology. Social Scientists study the social and cultural aspects of human life, including our relationships with each other, our institutions, and our environment. Social Science is important because it helps us to understand the social experience. By studying social and cultural phenomena, we can learn more about ourselves, our relationships with society, and the world around us. Social Science research is used to inform a wide range of decisions, including public policy, business strategy, and social program development. Social Science Branches of Social Science Social scientists study a wide range of topics, including: Branches of Social Science Anthropology: The study of human societies and cultures, past and present. Economics: The study of how people produce, distribute, and consume goods and services. Geography: The study of the Earth's surface, as well as the distribution of natural resources and the effects of human activity on the environment. History: The study of past events and their impact on the present. Political science: The study of government and politics, including the institutions, processes, and behaviors associated with political power and authority. Psychology: The study of human behavior and mental processes. Sociology: The study of human social behavior, especially the groups and institutions that shape it. Divisions of Social Science There are mainly four branches of Social Science mentioned below. School Social Science Below are the subject wise resources for School Social Science. History Chola Dynasty Delhi Sultanate Mughal Empire Revolt of 1857 Ahom Dynasty French Revolution Subsidiary Alliance B.R. Ambedkar and his Contributions Rowlatt Act and Jallianwala Bagh Massacre 1919 Doctrine of Lapse Nationalism in India Rise of Nationalism in Europe Iron and Steel Industry in India Political Science Secularism in India Constitution of India President of India Levels of Governance in India Election System in India Political Executive Role of Judiciary in India Women Empowerment Political Parties Powers and Functions of Supreme Court Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Bhopal Gas Tragedy Challenges to Democracy Federalism Geography What is Biosphere? Natural Resources Principles of Sustainable Development Land Utilization and Land Use Pattern in India Role of Agriculture in Indian Economy Types Of Resources Flora and Fauna Natural Vegetation in India Importance

of Supreme Court Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Bhopal Gas Tragedy Challenges to Democracy Federalism Geography What is Biosphere? Natural Resources Principles of Sustainable Development Land Utilization and Land Use Pattern in India Role of Agriculture in Indian Economy Types Of Resources Flora and Fauna Natural Vegetation in India Importance of Manufacturing Industries Climate of India Soil Formation Rainfall in India Landforms on Earth Economics Sectors of Indian Economy Food Security in India Unemployment in India Poverty Role of Banks Barter System Why Ration Shops are Necessary? Consumer Rights Roles and Responsibilities of Government Impact of Globalization on India Anti-Poverty Measures NABARD Public Facilities Money and Credit SSC for Government Exams Staff Selection Commission SSC covers a broad range of topics from history, geography, civics, and economics. The aim of the SSC section is to assess the candidate's general knowledge and understanding of the world around them. History Nagara Style of Temples Industrial Revolution in Britain: Causes and Effects Types of Taxes of Delhi Sultanate Important Battles of Modern Indian History List of the Important Taxes in Ancient Indian History List of Important Modern Indian History Books and their Writer Prehistoric Age Of India Part-I Harappan Civilization GK Questions on Sayyid Dynasty Important Inscriptions of Ancient Indian History Polity List of Important Commissions in India List of Important Committees in India 24th Twenty Fourth Amendment Act, 1971 - Indian Constitution List of Lok Sabha Speakers 1952-2023Laws of Production Why Fundamental Duties Are Not Enforceable By Law? Government of India Act 1935 Election Of President In India The State Legislature Fundamental Duties - Article 51A Chief Election Commissioners of India 1950-2022 Geography States and Capitals in India MCQ on Forest and Wildlife in India Asian Countries with their Capitals List of Major Indian Seaports Important Canals of the World Types Of Ecosystem Oceania Countries with their Capitals Finance and Economics Characteristics of Monopolistic Competition Laws of Production Different Branches of Economics Important Features of Indian Economy Production Possibilities Curve PPC in Economics Methods of Economic Analysis The Scope and Nature of Economics Balance Sheet: Meaning, Format, Need and Objectives Rectification of Errors - Definition, Types Examples MANUFACTURING ACCOUNT PROFIT AND LOSS APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT UPSC Social science is an important part of the UPSC syllabus s, as it covers a wide range of topics that are relevant to the work of an IAS officer. These topics include: History Swami Dayanand Saraswati Economic

Errors - Definition, Types Examples MANUFACTURING ACCOUNT PROFIT AND LOSS APPROPRIATION ACCOUNT UPSC Social science is an important part of the UPSC syllabus s, as it covers a wide range of topics that are relevant to the work of an IAS officer. These topics include: History Swami Dayanand Saraswati Economic Life of Harappan Civilization Important Leaders Associated With The Revolt Of 1857 Ramakrishna Mission - Role of Swami Vivekananda in Social Reform French Revolution 1789-1799 Russian Revolution: Cause, History, Timeline, Bolsheviks Role of Several Foreigners in Indian Freedom Struggle Relevance of Gandhian Principles or Philosophy in the 21st Century Causes of Failure of 1857 Revolt Modern Indian History Notes For UPSC Political Science NCERT Indian Polity Notes for UPSC Exam 2024 Role and Functions of NGOs Role of Caste in Indian Politics Challenges in Indian Education System Lokpal and Lokayukta Act 2013 - Features, Powers and Functions Discretionary Powers of President of India Role of Regional Parties in India Federal Features of Indian Constitution - Federalism in India Communism vs Fascism Judicial System: Challenges and Reform Election Deposit Rule in India Types of Jurisdiction of Supreme Court Geography Top 10 Highest Mountains in the World 2023 Cloudburst - Definition, Impacts and Prevention What is Migration? Types, and Causes Importance of Water Conservation and Management Salinity of Ocean Water Government Steps to Control Floods and Droughts Political Map of India Top 10 Largest Cities in the World Economics Objectives And Principles Of Taxation New Industrial Policy 1991 Strategies to Improve Health Facility in India Non-Farming Production Activities and Their Impact on Economy Pros and Cons of Globalization 4 Major Sectors of an Economy Small Industries Development Bank of India SIDBI Wardha Scheme of Basic Education 1937 Multiple Answer Questions Here are some multiple-answer questions MAQs related to different branches of social science: History What are the Contributions of Jyotiba Rao Phule to Indian Society? Write a short note on Nalanda University Development in India After Independence B.R.Ambedkar and his Contribution Quit India Movement - History, Causes, Phases, Importance Rowlatt Act and Jallianwala Bagh Massacre 1919 Civil Disobedience Movement Salient Features of Indian Constitution What was the role of Mahatma Gandhi in the Champaran Movement? Write a short note on Tipu Sultan Nationalism in India - CBSE Class 10 History Notes Chapter 2 Doctrine of Lapse Definition, History, Objective, Impacts Political Science Political Parties : Functions, Importance and Party System Powers and

Indian Constitution What was the role of Mahatma Gandhi in the Champaran Movement? Write a short note on Tipu Sultan Nationalism in India - CBSE Class 10 History Notes Chapter 2 Doctrine of Lapse Definition, History, Objective, Impacts Political Science Political Parties : Functions, Importance and Party System Powers and Functions of Supreme Court Why is Judicial Independence Important? What is the need for Political Institutions? Difference between Political and Permanent Executive What are the three levels of governance in India? What are the functions of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha? What are the challenges to Cultural Diversity? What is the importance of preamble in the constitution? What is Role Conflict and Why does it occur? Describe the Rules and Regulations regarding Election Campaign in India What is the difference between Prudential and Moral Power Sharing? What makes Elections in India Democratic? What is significance of the phrase "We the people of India" in the Preamble? Geography Differentiate between the farms in India and the USA What are the Relief Features of India? Cloudburst - Definition, Impacts and Prevention Why are Rivers important for the Countrys Economy? Difference between Flora and Fauna What are the features of public sector enterprises? Which states of India have Oil-fields? What is the meaning and importance of traffic signal lights? Road Transport - Definition, Types, Examples Disaster Management, Types, Cycle Projects for Class 9, 10 Environmental Pollution Essay Physical Features of India What is Biosphere? Economics What are the measures taken by India to reduce Poverty? What is the role of MNC's in Globalization Process? What is Educated Unemployment and reasons for it's prevalence in India? Explain the various causes of unemployment in India Difference between Developed and Underdeveloped Economy Describe the Impact of Globalisation on Indian Economy What are the functions of NABARD? What is Barter System? Definition, Examples, Benefits, Limits Analyse the Functions of Consumer Protection Council Do you think the Classification of Economic Activities into Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary is useful? Explain how. How is the Tertiary Sector different from other Sectors? What is Minimum Support Price? What are the components of the money supply? What is the role of consumers in the market-place? What are the advantages of globalisation in India? What are Consumer Forums and what is their importance? Careers in Social Science There are many different career opportunities available to social science graduates. Social scientists may work in

of the money supply? What is the role of consumers in the market-place? What are the advantages of globalisation in India? What are Consumer Forums and what is their importance? Careers in Social Science There are many different career opportunities available to social science graduates. Social scientists may work in academia, government, business, or non-profit organizations. Some common job titles for social science graduates include: Anthropologist Economist Geographer Historian Political scientist Psychologist Sociologist Social worker Policy analyst Program manager Researcher Consultant The Future of Social Science Social Sciences is a ever-evolving field of study. As the world changes, social scientists are constantly adapting their research methods and theories to keep up with the changing times. In the future, social scientists will continue to play an important role in understanding and addressing the challenges facing our world. Despite the challenges, the future of social science is bright. Social scientists are more connected than ever before, and there is a growing global community of scholars working together to address the challenges facing our world. Social science has the potential to make a real difference in the world, and it is an important field of study for anyone who wants to understand the human experience and make a positive impact on the world. You Might Also Like Biology Maths Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article CBSE Syllabus for Class 7 Social Science 2023-24 kartik Follow Improve Article Tags : School Learning School History School Geography School Polity School Economics Social Science 2 More

Similar Topics Python 20.1k articles AI-ML-DS 5.5k articles Python-numpy 1.3k articles python 1.1k articles python-list 410 articles python-dict 240 articles Python numpy-ndarray 110 articles Python numpy-Matrix Function 98 articles Numpy 72 articles Python numpy-Basics 6 articles Python numpy-arrayCreation 39 posts Popular Articles Recent Articles How to use NumPy where with multiple conditions in Python ? Last Updated: 05 April 2021 In Python, NumPy has a number of library functions to create the array and where is one of them to create an array from the satisfied condit ...read more Python Python-numpy Picked Python numpy-arrayCreation How to create an empty and a full NumPy array? Last Updated: 28 January 2025 Creating arrays is a basic operation in NumPy. Empty array: This array isnt initialized with any specific values. Its like a blank pag ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation Numpy AI-ML-DS numpy.pad function in Python Last Updated: 01 October 2020 numpy.pad function is used to pad the Numpy arrays. Sometimes there is a need to perform padding in Numpy arrays, then numPy.pad functio ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation Similar Topics Python 20.1k articles AI-ML-DS 5.5k articles Python-numpy 1.3k articles python 1.1k articles python-list 410 articles python-dict 240 articles Python numpy-ndarray 110 articles Python numpy-Matrix Function 98 articles Numpy 72 articles Python numpy-Basics 6 articles How to generate 2-D Gaussian array using NumPy? Last Updated: 19 August 2022 In this article, let us discuss how to generate a 2-D Gaussian array using NumPy. To create a 2 D Gaussian array using the Numpy python modu ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation Creating a one-dimensional NumPy array Last Updated: 27 January 2025 One-dimensional array contains elements only in one dimension. In other words, the shape of the NumPy array should contain only one value in ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation python NumPy Array Shape Last Updated: 28 December 2023 The shape of an array can be defined as the number of elements in each dimension. Dimension is the number of indices or subscripts, that we ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation NumPy Array in Python Last Updated: 24 January 2025 NumPy Numerical Python is a powerful library for numerical computations in Python. It is commonly referred to multidimensional container t ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation Convert Python List to numpy Arrays Last Updated: 23 October 2024 NumPy arrays are more efficient than Python lists, especially for numerical operations on large

Numerical Python is a powerful library for numerical computations in Python. It is commonly referred to multidimensional container t ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation Convert Python List to numpy Arrays Last Updated: 23 October 2024 NumPy arrays are more efficient than Python lists, especially for numerical operations on large datasets. NumPy provides two methods for con ...read more Python python-list Picked Python numpy-arrayCreation numpy.loadtxt in Python Last Updated: 19 March 2025 numpy.loadtxt function is used to load data from a text file and return it as a NumPy array. It is ideal for reading large data sets that ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation numpy.zeros in Python Last Updated: 24 January 2025 numpy.zeros function creates a new array of specified shapes and types, filled with zeros. It is beneficial when you need a placeholder ar ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation Numpy AI-ML-DS NumPy - linspace Function Last Updated: 24 January 2025 linspace function in NumPy returns an array of evenly spaced numbers over a specified range. Unlike the range function in Python that ge ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation numpy.ones in Python Last Updated: 08 March 2024 The numpy.ones function returns a new array of given shape and type, with ones.Syntax: numpy.onesshape, dtype None, order 'C' Parame ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation numpy.eye in Python Last Updated: 27 January 2025 numpy.eye is a function in the NumPy library that creates a 2D array with ones on the diagonal and zeros elsewhere. This function is often ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation numpy.arange in Python Last Updated: 24 January 2025 numpy.arange function creates an array of evenly spaced values within a given interval. It is similar to Python's built-in range functio ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation numpy.identity in Python Last Updated: 22 April 2025 numpy.identity function is used to create an identity matrix which is used to make identity matrix. This is commonly used in linear algebr ...read more Python Python-numpy Python numpy-arrayCreation 1 2 3 Last 1 2 3 Last 1 2 3 Last

Classification of Colloids Last Updated : 27 Sep, 2021 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Before we get into the specifics of how we classify colloids, its important to first define what a colloid is. A colloid is a material made up of big molecules mixed with another substance in chemistry. This encompasses a wide range of items, many of which you may already have in your house, which is why its critical that we break down their classes. The various approaches are employed depending on the applications or to think about colloids in various ways. Colloids can be categorised based on the physical states of the dispersion medium and dispersed phase, the kind of interaction between the two, or the particle types in the dispersed phase. Dispersion Medium: It is the medium or phase in the colloidal solution in which the particles are dispersed uniformly. e.g. In gold sol, water is the dispersion medium since the gold particles are distributed in it. In fog, the air is the dispersion medium since the liquid is distributed in it. Dispersed phase: It is the phase that is dispersed uniformly throughout the colloidal solution. e.g. In gold sol, the particles of gold is the dispersed phase. In clouds, the particles of dust and water vapour are the dispersed phase. Classification of Colloids The colloids are classified into different categories based on different criteria: Classification of colloids based on the Physical states of the dispersion phase and the dispersion medium. Classification of colloids on the basis of interaction between the molecules Classification of colloids on the basis of the size of the particles. Classification of Colloids on the Basis of the Physical States of the Dispersion Phase and the Dispersion Medium Colloids can be classified into seven categories on the basis of dispersion phase and the dispersion medium. They are given in the below table: Dispersed Phase Dispersion Medium Name of Colloid Examples Solid Solid Solid sol Coloured Glass, Gemstones, Rock Salt, some alloys. Solid Liquid Sol Paints, inks, gold sol, silver sol, muddy water, starch. Solid Gas Solid aerosol Smoke, dust storms, exhaust from industries and automobiles. Liquid Solid Gels Jellies, Cheese, curd, shoe-polish. Liquid Liquid Emulsion Milk, butter, cod liver oil Gas Solid Solid Foam Pumice stone, rubber, cake. Gas Liquid Foam Soap lather, soda CO 2 is dissolved in water water, whipped cream The terms used in the

dust storms, exhaust from industries and automobiles. Liquid Solid Gels Jellies, Cheese, curd, shoe-polish. Liquid Liquid Emulsion Milk, butter, cod liver oil Gas Solid Solid Foam Pumice stone, rubber, cake. Gas Liquid Foam Soap lather, soda CO 2 is dissolved in water water, whipped cream The terms used in the above table are defined as below: Emulsion: A fine dispersion of minute droplets of one liquid into another immiscible liquid is called Emulsion. The diameter of the droplets ranges from 10 -4 to 10 -6 cm. Solid Aerosols A solution in which very minute fine particles of solid particles are dispersed into a gas is called solid aerosols. Solid Sols A colloidal system in which the particles of one solid substance is dispersed into the particles of another solid substance. Gels A colloidal solution in which minute droplets of liquid is dispersed into a solid dispersion medium. Solid Foam A colloidal solution in which minute particles of gas is dissolved into a solid dispersion medium. Classification of Colloids on the basis of Interaction between molecules On the basis of the interaction between the molecules the colloids can be classified into two types: Lyophilic Colloids solvent-loving These types of colloidal solutions have a strong affinity between the particles of the dispersed phase and the particles of the dispersed medium. They are very stable. They cannot be coagulated easily and require a strong electrolyte for coagulation. Some examples of Lyophilic Colloids are Gum, Starch, gelatin, proteins. If water is used as a dispersion medium in lyophilic colloids, then it is called hydrophilic colloids. Lyophobic Colloids solvent-hating These types of colloidal solutions have a weak affinity between the particles of the dispersed phase and the particles of the dispersion medium. They are less stable than the lyophilic colloids. They can be easily coagulated by adding a little electrolyte. Some examples of Lyophobic colloids are Silver Sol, Ferric hydroxide sol and arsenious sulfide sol. If water is used as a dispersion medium in lyophilic colloids, then it is called hydrophobic colloids. Classification of Colloids on the basis of the Size of the colloidal particles Colloids are divided into three different categories based on the size of the colloidal particles, Multimolecular Colloids These colloids consist of particles that are made from large aggregates of atoms or molecules. The atoms and molecules of the particles are held together by van der Waals force. For example, particles

Colloids are divided into three different categories based on the size of the colloidal particles, Multimolecular Colloids These colloids consist of particles that are made from large aggregates of atoms or molecules. The atoms and molecules of the particles are held together by van der Waals force. For example, particles are present in the gold and Sulphur sols. Macromolecular Colloids The colloids which are formed by dissolving macromolecules in suitable solvents are called macromolecular colloids. For example, Natural polymers like proteins, starch etc. Associated colloids There are certain substances whose molecules are diphilic in nature which means that the molecules of these particles contain a non-polar hydrophilic part and a polar hydrophobic part. At low concentration, these particles act as electrolytes but at high concentration, these particles act as colloids and the colloidal solution formed from these particles is called Associated colloidal solutions. These colloidal particles are called micelles. Micelles are formed above a certain concentration of the solution. For example, Soap and detergents form associated colloids. Questions Question 1. The particles of the colloidal solution do not settle down when left undisturbed, but the particles of the suspension do. Explain. Answer: The particles of the colloidal solution is in the range of 10-7 10-5 cm 1-100 nm while the particles of the suspension are in the range of 10-5 100nm. Thus, it is very clear the particles of the colloidal solution are much smaller than the particles of the suspension. Thus, due to the smaller size of the particles, there is greater molecular interaction between the particles which holds them and thus, does not settle down when left undisturbed. Question 2: How will you distinguish between a colloidal solution and a suspension with the help of filter paper? Answer: We can easily distinguish between a colloidal solution and a suspension with the help of filter paper by filtering both the solution through the filter paper. You will find that the particles of the colloidal solution can easily pass through the filter paper but the particles of the suspension cannot pass through the filter paper. Question 3: Smoke and clouds both are aerosols. Are they the same? Explain. Answer: No, they are not the same. This is because smoke is a solid aerosol where the dispersion medium is gas and the dispersed phase is solid while clouds are liquid aerosol where the dispersion medium is liquid but the dispersed phase

both are aerosols. Are they the same? Explain. Answer: No, they are not the same. This is because smoke is a solid aerosol where the dispersion medium is gas and the dispersed phase is solid while clouds are liquid aerosol where the dispersion medium is liquid but the dispersed phase is liquid. Thus, they are different. Question 4: List the main four properties of colloids. Answer: The four main properties of colloids are: They are a heterogeneous mixture. The size of the colloidal particles is too small to be seen by naked eyes. The particles of the colloids are large enough to scatter light and thus shows the Tyndall effect. They cannot be separated by using filter paper as they can pass through filter paper. Question 5: State the dispersion medium and dispersed phase of the following colloids: a Paints b Rock Salt c Whipped Cream Answer: The following table shows the dispersion medium along with the dispersed phase of the given colloids as, Colloid Dispersion Medium Dispersed Phase a Paints Liquid Solid b Rock Salt Solid Solid c Whipped Cream Liquid Gas Question 6: What is the Tyndall effect? Answer: When a beam of light is allowed to pass through a colloidal solution placed in a dark room, we can see the illuminated path of light from a direction of right angles to the direction of incident light due to the scattering of the light due to the colloidal particles. This phenomenon of scattering of light by the particles of the colloids is known as the Tyndall effect. Question 7: What are the main differences between the Lyophilic Colloids and Lyophobic Colloids? Answer: Following are the differences between the Lyophilic Colloids and Lyophobic Colloids: Lyophilic Colloids Lyophobic Colloids 1. These types of colloidal solutions have a strong affinity between the particles of the dispersed phase and the particles of the dispersed medium. These types of colloidal solutions have a weak affinity between the particles of the dispersed phase and the particles of the dispersion medium. 2. These colloids are more stable and are reversible in nature These colloids are less stable and are irreversible in nature. 3. They can be easily prepared. These colloids required special methods of preparation and cannot be easily prepared. 4. They do not coagulate easily and require strong electrolytes to coagulate. They can be coagulated easily by using weak electrolytes or just by boiling.

DNA: Structure, Types, and Functions Last Updated : 10 Apr, 2024 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report DNA structure is made of nucleotide base pairs other than RNA. DNA is the hereditary material that is possessed by all the organisms found on the Earth except certain virus species. DNA functions involve the transfer of genetic information from generation to generation. The full form of DNA is Deoxyribonucleic acid which stands; deoxy stands for missing oxygen, ribo stands for ribose sugar, nucleic represents the nucleus of a cell, and acid represents the acidic nature of DNA due to phosphorus. In this article, we will cover DNA structure and functions, its types, and importance. Table of Content What is DNA? Who Discovered DNA? Properties of DNA Structure of DNA Chromosomes Types of DNA Functions of DNA Difference between RNA and DNA DNA as the Genetic Material Importance of DNA DNA Replication What is DNA? DNA or Deoxyribonucleic Acid is the genetic material that codes the information for all the different processes that make an organism living like growth, replication, metabolism, etc. DNA is present in each cell except for some viral species, RBCs, sieve cells, etc. and is passed down from parents to their offspring. DNA is comprised of units called nucleotides . DNA is self-replicating, a long stretch of nucleotides. DNA is a form of nucleic acid and is one of the four major macromolecules that make up the living system. In eukaryotic cells, it is found in the nucleus of the cell whereas in prokaryotes it is found free-floating in the cell cytoplasm . Other than the nucleus DNA is also found in mitochondria , chloroplast, and in smaller forms called plasmid in certain bacterial species. Also Read: Difference Between Nucleotide and Nucleoside Nucleotides Nucleotides are the basic unit of the genetic material. Every nucleotide contains three parts: a phosphate group one phosphorus bond to four oxygen particles, a sugar backbone deoxyribose or ribose, and nitrogenous bases . The nitrogen bases are adenine A, thymine T in the case of DNA, guanine G, cytosine C, and uracil U in the case of RNA. Together, these act as the letters that make up the hereditary code of our DNA. The nitrogenous bases are divided into two groups; Purines G and A, and pyrimidines C, U, and T. Nucleotides are joined together to form two long strands that twist to

in the case of RNA. Together, these act as the letters that make up the hereditary code of our DNA. The nitrogenous bases are divided into two groups; Purines G and A, and pyrimidines C, U, and T. Nucleotides are joined together to form two long strands that twist to form a structure called the double helix . On the off chance that you consider the twofold helix structure as a ladder, the phosphate and sugar particles would be the sides, while the base matches would be the steps. The bases on one strand pair with the bases on another strand: Adenine matches with thymine in DNA or uracil in RNA A-TU, and guanine matches with cytosine G-C. Also Read: Difference Between Purines and Pyrimidines Who Discovered DNA? The brief history of DNA includes In 1869, Friedrich Miescher identified a substance in the nuclei of human WBC which he named nuclein. In 1919, based on Mieschers work Phoebus Levene proposed the polynucleotide model of nucleic acid. Based on Levenes work Erwin Chargaff and Oswald Avery delved into the gene structure and composition. Erwin Chargaff has the Chargaffs rule for A, T, G, and C arrangement and composition. In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick gave the double helix model of DNA with the help of X-ray crystallography done by Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins. Properties of DNA DNA shows the following main characteristics; It is a long polymer made of repeating units of nucleotides A, T, G, and C It is made up of two strands that are held together by a hydrogen bond to form a double helical structure. DNA can have hundreds to millions of nucleotides in it. The largest human chromosome is chromosome no. 1 with around 220 million base pairs. The smallest human chromosome is the chromosome no. 21 with around 45 million base pairs. A nucleotide is formed when deoxyribose sugar is connected to nitrogenous base and a phosphate group. The backbone of DNA is formed when multiple units of sugar are joined by phosphodiester bonds. The sugars are held together by phosphate groups in such a manner that there are phosphodiester connections between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugar rings. These are the 3-end three prime end and 5-end five prime end carbons. The two DNA strands will have opposite polarity i.e. if one strand is 3-end to 5-end then the

such a manner that there are phosphodiester connections between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugar rings. These are the 3-end three prime end and 5-end five prime end carbons. The two DNA strands will have opposite polarity i.e. if one strand is 3-end to 5-end then the other will be 5-end to 3-end. Chargaffs rule states that the amounts of adenine A and thymine T are usually similar, as are the amounts of guanine G and cytosine C. Structure of DNA The DNA structure represents a helical ladder and is depicted as a double helix. It is a nucleic corrosive, and all nucleic acids are comprised of nucleotides. The structure of DNA molecule is made out of units called nucleotides , and every nucleotide is made out of three parts i.e. sugar, phosphate, and nitrogen bases. The bases A, T, G, and C are held by the sugar-phosphate complex to form the DNA strands. These 4 Nitrogenous bases pair together in an accompanying manner: A with T and C with G . The two strands of DNA are arranged in opposite polarity. These strands are kept together by the hydrogen bond that is available between the two corresponding nitrogenous bases. There are 10.5 base pairs per turn of the helix and the pitch of every helix is 3.4 nm . Subsequently, the distance between two back-to-back base matches i.e., hydrogen-bound bases of the opposite strands is 0.34 nm . The helix is right-handed, meaning that the chains rotate counterclockwise as they approach an observer observing the longitudinal axis. On one end of a strand, an exposed 5-hydroxyl group is found, frequently with connected phosphates, whereas the other end has a free 3-hydroxyl group present. The two strands are arranged oppositely with each other. This structure is best explained by the double-helical model given by Watson and Cricks. Chromosomes The double helical structure of the DNA is usually too long almost 2 meters in length to be placed in a nucleus linearly so the DNA is supercoiled to make it fit into the space of the nucleus. As the DNA is helical, whenever it is rotated any further it will coil many times upon itself forming a super coil. This coiling is assisted by proteins to make the long thread compactly packed to fit inside the nucleus. These packed structures are found in the form of thread-like structures

the DNA is helical, whenever it is rotated any further it will coil many times upon itself forming a super coil. This coiling is assisted by proteins to make the long thread compactly packed to fit inside the nucleus. These packed structures are found in the form of thread-like structures called chromosomes. Types of DNA Following are some most common types of DNA found; Nuclear DNA nDNA : The eukaryotic cells have a nucleus that contains the genetic material of the cell i.e. the DNA. This form of DNA that controls all the general characteristics of cell is called nuclear DNA. Mitochondrial DNA mtDNA: Mitochondria are semi-autonomous as they possess their DNA, RNA, and ribosomes. This DNA is called mitochondrial DNA and it usually comes from the mother in case of sexually reproducing organisms. A-DNA : These are right-handed double helical DNA that have 11 bases per complete turn with a 2.3 nm diameter of the helix. B-DNA : It is the typical right-handed double helical DNA found in most of the cells. They have 10 bases per complete turn with a 1.9 nm diameter of the helix. C-DNA : It is right-handed double helical DNA that has 9.3 bases per complete turn with a 1.9 nm diameter of the helix. D-DNA: Lacks the Guanine G base unit making it an interesting variation and a rare form. It has 8 base pairs per complete turn with 2.3 nm diameter of the helix. E-DNA : It is an eccentric and extended form of DNA that is a right-handed helix. They have 7.5 bases per complete turn with a 2.3 nm diameter of the helix. Z-DNA : It has a zig-zag pattern with a left-handed helix that has 12 bases per complete turn with a 1.8 nm diameter of the helix. Functions of DNA Following are some of the important functions of DNA; It carries and transfers the genetic information. The genetic information code of functional proteins. DNA transfers the genetic information from one generation to the next. It regulates the metabolic reactions of the cell. It helps in the synthesis of RNA by transcription. It is self-replicative i.e. DNA can make its copies. It controls all the aspects of an organisms development. It can be used for DNA fingerprinting during any crime or parental dispute. It can undergo abrupt changes or mutations due to any possible reason. It gives the required

RNA by transcription. It is self-replicative i.e. DNA can make its copies. It controls all the aspects of an organisms development. It can be used for DNA fingerprinting during any crime or parental dispute. It can undergo abrupt changes or mutations due to any possible reason. It gives the required information to design gene-based therapy for disease. Difference between RNA and DNA Some of the common differences between DNA and RNA are mentioned here: Characteristics DNA RNA Abbreviation DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid RNA Ribonucleic acid Sugar Deoxyribose sugar 2OH Ribose sugar Bases Adenine, Thymine, Guanine, Cytosine Adenine, Uracil, Guanine, Cytosine Structure Double-stranded Usually single-stranded Location Mostly in the nucleus and mitochondria of the cell. Found in the nucleus, ribosome, and cytoplasm Stability More stable and less prone to change Less stable and more prone to change Length Longer and can be up to millions of base pairs Shorter and typically several hundred to a few thousand nucleotides long Types There is only one type of DNA RNA comes in a variety of forms, such as messenger RNA mRNA, transfer RNA tRNA, and ribosomal RNA rRNA Function Stores genetic information Acts as a template for protein synthesis Role in protein synthesis DNA provides the genetic code, which is transcribed into mRNA RNA serves as the template for protein synthesis mRNA and carries out protein synthesis tRNA and rRNA Examples Found in chromosome. Present in various types like mRNA, tRNA, and rRNA Also Read: Difference Between DNA and RNA DNA as the Genetic Material Both DNA and RNA contain the sugar ribose, which is a ring of carbon molecules encompassed by oxygen and hydrogen. In any case, though RNA contains a complete ribose sugar, DNA contains a ribose sugar that has lost one oxygen and one hydrogen particle. The additional oxygen and hydrogen content in RNA leaves it susceptible to hydrolysis by enzymes. Under ordinary cell conditions, RNA goes through hydrolysis nearly multiple times quicker than DNA, which makes DNA a more stable particle. So, overall DNA is the chosen genetic material because; DNA is more easily repaired. DNA Information is more stable to the activity of enzymes. Double-stranded and allows double-checking for any error. Importance of DNA DNA contains the information that is fundamental for a living being to develop, function, and reproduce. DNA assists your body with development. The cells read this code on three bases all at once to create

to the activity of enzymes. Double-stranded and allows double-checking for any error. Importance of DNA DNA contains the information that is fundamental for a living being to develop, function, and reproduce. DNA assists your body with development. The cells read this code on three bases all at once to create proteins that are fundamental for development and growth. Each combination of three nucleotide bases codes to amino acids , which are the structure blocks of proteins . Proteins are the main functional unit that directly and indirectly gets associated with all the functions of living systems when synthesized correctly. DNA Replication DNA replication is the process by which the DNA makes its copy. In this process, the two strands break to make two templates on which new opposite strands are formed. That means 1 double helical DNA will give rise to two new double helical DNA. As in the new DNA one strand comes from the parent DNA, the process is therefore called semi-conservative. DNA replication involves the following steps; Initiation: When the two strands of DNA separate to mark the beginning of the process. Elongation: When new bases are paired with the parental strand to form the new strand. Termination: When the newly attached base pair is joined by the sugar-phosphate backbone the process terminates thus forming a new double helix of DNA. Conclusion: DNA Structure, Types, and Functions DNA, the hereditary material present in almost all organisms, consists of nucleotide base pairs. It is important for genetic transfer across generations. It stands for Deoxyribonucleic Acid, reflecting its composition of deoxyribose sugar, phosphate, and nitrogenous bases, with adenine pairing with thymine and guanine with cytosine. The structure of DNA, resembling a twisted ladder or double helix, comprises nucleotides forming long strands, held together by hydrogen bonds between complementary base pairs. It plays vital roles in encoding genetic information, regulating metabolic processes, and facilitating cellular activities, essential for lifes continuity and diversity. Also Read: Why is DNA Negatively Charged? Difference between Conservative and Semiconservative Replication Diagram of DNA Replication Difference Between Gene and DNA Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Packaging of DNA Helix: Histones Importance L lavanyasirisolla Follow Improve Article Tags : Biology MAQ Class 12 School Biology School Learning Genetics Molecular Biology 2 More

Constitution of India Last Updated : 08 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Constitution of India is a written statement of the fundamental values or established points of reference that form the legal foundation of a nation, organization, or another type of entity and generally specify how that entity is to be governed. Most constitutions aim to manage the connection between establishments of the state, specifically the relationship between the Executive, or leaders, the Legislature-lawmaking body, and the Judiciary. One of the most comprehensive and influential constitutions in the world is the Constitution of India , which serves as a symbol of the nations dedication to equality, liberty, justice, and fraternity. Constitution of India W hat is the Constitution of India? The Constitution of India is a remarkable document that serves as the supreme law of India. Indian Constitution might be supposed to be an acquired constitution, but the credit of its composer lies in getting together the best elements of every one of the current constitutions. The original constitution has been changed over the period by various amendments which have been brought like the 7th, 42nd, 44th, and 74th Amendments. Constitution of India The Constitution of India Indias Constitution, adopted on November 26, 1949, is a testament to the nations aspirations for a democratic, secular, and independent republic. It embodies the collective vision of the Indian people for a just and equitable society where fundamental rights are upheld, diversity is respected, and citizens can participate in the democratic process. Important Amendments of the Constitution of India The Indian Constitution is not a rigid document but is amended by the Parliament of India by various rules and have made various changes in the Constitution of India. Some important amendments of Indian Constitution are as follows: 42nd Amendment 44th Amendment 42nd Amendment is also known as Mini Constitution as several changes are made in the constitution and was during Emergency in 1976. In the year 1973, Supreme Court had ruled in Kesavananda Bharati case where the constituent power of Parliament was under Article 368, which does not empower it for alteration of the basic structure of constitution. Constitution of India Preamble The first constitution to start with preamble was the American constitution and the Indian constitution also starts with one. Preamble refers to the introduction or the preface of the constitution and also sums up the essence

empower it for alteration of the basic structure of constitution. Constitution of India Preamble The first constitution to start with preamble was the American constitution and the Indian constitution also starts with one. Preamble refers to the introduction or the preface of the constitution and also sums up the essence of constitution. N A Palkhivala has referred to the Preamble as Identity card of Constitution. The Preamble is based on Pandit Nehrus Objective Resolution which he moved and was also adopted by Constituent Assembly. The Preamble came to be amended in 1976 by 42nd Amendment, which added socialist, secular and integrity to it. Ingredients of the Preamble The 4 components of Preamble are as follows: Source of authority of the Constitution Nature of the Indian State Objectives of the Constitution Constitution date of adoption: 26th November 1949 Why Constitution of India is called Bag of Borrowing? The Constitution has many borrowed features. The countrys founding fathers were wise enough to be borrowed with good features from different nations and could mould a constitution that suits India. The influences from other constitutions are listed below: Constitution Borrowed Features British Parliamentary system Lower House of Parliament is more powerful than Upper House Constitutional Head of State Prevalence of the rule of law US Fundamental Rights Preamble Functions of Vice- President Amendment of Constitution Independence of the Judiciary Nature and functions of Supreme Court Australian Procedure for solving deadlock over concurrent subjects exist between Centre and States. List of concurrent powers. Irish Directive Principles of State Policy Method of nomination of members for Rajya Sabha Weimar Constitution of Germany Powers of the President Canadian Provisions of a strong nation Name of Union of India Vesting residuary powers South African Election of members of Rajya Sabha was on basis of proportional representation by state legislatures. Procedure of amendment with 2-3rd majority in Parliament. Features of the Constitution Important features of the constitution are as follows: Collection of many Constitutions Integrate collected insight into various constitutions. Basic privileges like fundamental rights are displayed in the American Constitution. Embraced the parliamentary arrangement of government in the United Kingdom. Took the possibility of mandate standards of State strategy from the constitution of Eire. Added elaborate arrangements connecting with crises in the radiance of the constitution of the German Reich. Nitty-gritty managerial arrangements included. Quirk of the Issues to be Addressed The tremendousness of the nation and the

United Kingdom. Took the possibility of mandate standards of State strategy from the constitution of Eire. Added elaborate arrangements connecting with crises in the radiance of the constitution of the German Reich. Nitty-gritty managerial arrangements included. Quirk of the Issues to be Addressed The tremendousness of the nation and the extraordinary idea of issues added to the heft of the Constitution. There is one section connected with the timetable position and Tribes other in reverse classes; one section connecting with true language and the other connecting with crisis arrangements. The parliament framework depends on the guidance of participation and coordination between the administrative and leaders while the official work depends on the regulation of the partition of abilities between the two organs. More Flexible than Rigid Parliament has been empowered with the right to change or alter a large number of the arrangements of constitutions by a basic majority; regulations such as enhancing the constitution; compromise of a constitution with parliamentary sovereignty. Fundamental Rights Basic freedom like fundamental rights while order standards are not enforceable in the courts the essential privileges can be in a split second maintained in the court. Social uniformity and equality are also ensured by the constitution, it is another significant component of the constitution that guarantees lawful and political equity and also social equality. Universal Adult Franchise Universal adult franchise also known as Universal Adult Suffrage, without Communal Portrayal: The reception of widespread grown-up testimonials with next to no capability of sex property tax collection is a strong trial in India, having respect to the immense degree of the nation and its populace with a mind-boggling ignorance. The testimonial in India, it ought to be noted, is more extensive than in England or the United States. Parliamentary Form of Government The Constitution of India has decided on the British Parliamentary System of Government as opposed to the American Presidential arrangement of government. The parliamentary framework depends on the guideline of participation and coordination between the administrative and leader organs while the official framework depends on the regulation of the partition of abilities between the two organs. Importance of Constitution Governance and Rule of Law A constitution establishes the framework for governance and ensures that the government operates within defined limits and follows the rule of law. It provides a set of rules and principles that govern the functioning of the state, including the allocation of

organs. Importance of Constitution Governance and Rule of Law A constitution establishes the framework for governance and ensures that the government operates within defined limits and follows the rule of law. It provides a set of rules and principles that govern the functioning of the state, including the allocation of powers, responsibilities, and limitations of different branches of government. Protection of Fundamental Rights A constitution guarantees fundamental rights and freedoms to citizens, such as the right to equality, freedom of speech, religion, and the right to life and liberty. These rights are essential for the protection of individual dignity, promoting social justice, and ensuring that citizens are not subject to arbitrary actions by the state. Separation of Powers A constitution establishes the separation of powers between the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government. This separation ensures a system of checks and balances, preventing the concentration of power in any one branch and safeguarding against potential abuses. Democratic Governance A constitution sets the framework for democratic governance by defining the electoral process, establishing the principle of universal suffrage, and ensuring free and fair elections. It provides the mechanisms for the formation and functioning of representative institutions, such as the parliament and state legislatures, enabling citizens to participate in the decision-making process. Protection of Minority Rights A constitution in a diverse country like India plays a crucial role in protecting the rights of minority communities and ensuring their representation and participation in the political process. It provides safeguards against discrimination, promotes social inclusion, and encourages the preservation of cultural, religious, and linguistic diversity. Legal Framework A constitution provides the legal framework for the functioning of the judicial system, including the establishment of courts, appointment of judges, and the administration of justice. It ensures access to justice, promotes the rule of law, and protects the rights of individuals through an independent and impartial judiciary. Impact of the Constitution on Indian Society The Constitution of India has deeply affected Indian society in many ways, influencing how things are socially, politically, and economically. We can see its impact by looking at its values and how it has made democracy and governing stronger. Constitutional Values and Their Influence The Constitution is not merely a legal document; it embodies a set of values that guide the nation and its citizens. These values include: Equality: The Constitution promises the same rights and chances to everyone, no matter

how it has made democracy and governing stronger. Constitutional Values and Their Influence The Constitution is not merely a legal document; it embodies a set of values that guide the nation and its citizens. These values include: Equality: The Constitution promises the same rights and chances to everyone, no matter their gender, religion, caste, or social position. This rule has helped stop unfair treatments and encouraged fairness for everyone in society. Justice: The Constitution ensures fairness in society, economy, and politics for everyone. It helps deal with past unfairness and supports actions that help disadvantaged groups. Freedom: The Constitution promises basic freedoms like speaking freely, practicing any religion, gathering, and forming groups. These freedoms make people stronger and support active community involvement. Secularism: The Constitution makes India a country where all religions are respected and allows people to follow any faith they choose. This has helped create peace among different religions and has added to the unity of the nation. Democracy: The Constitution sets up a democratic government where powers are divided, courts can work independently, and elections are fair. This setup helps power change hands peacefully and encourages people to take part in politics. Role in Strengthening Democracy and Governance The Constitution has played a crucial role in building and sustaining Indian democracy. It has established a system of: Separation of powers: The Constitution divides power among the legislature, executive, and judiciary, preventing the concentration of power and ensuring checks and balances. Federalism: India is a federal state, with power shared between the central government and the states. This structure allows for regional autonomy and flexibility in addressing local issues. Parliamentary democracy: The government is accountable to the legislature, which is elected by the people. This ensures that the government is responsive to the needs and aspirations of the citizens. Independent judiciary: The judiciary is independent of the government and has the power to review the constitutionality of laws and government actions. This safeguards individual rights and ensures that the government acts within the bounds of the law. Free and fair elections: The Constitution guarantees the right to vote and contest elections, providing a mechanism for peaceful transfer of power and ensuring that the government is representative of the people. Conclusion The Constitution of India represents the principles of a nation aiming for fairness, equality, and progress. Its more than just a set of rules; its the foundation of

and contest elections, providing a mechanism for peaceful transfer of power and ensuring that the government is representative of the people. Conclusion The Constitution of India represents the principles of a nation aiming for fairness, equality, and progress. Its more than just a set of rules; its the foundation of Indias democracy. By ensuring basic rights, supporting fairness, and creating a strong government system, the Constitution has been crucial in shaping India as a lively democracy. Its strength lies in how it can adapt to new situations while keeping democracys key values intact. The Constitution brings people together despite differences, making sure everyones rights are protected and they have a fair say. Even in todays complex times, the Constitution guides India towards a fairer and more equal society. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Fundamental Rights Articles 12-35: A Comprehensive Guide A akankshareddyalluri Follow Improve Article Tags : School Learning School Polity Social Science Political Science-MAQ

Mechanism of Enzymes Action Last Updated : 09 Oct, 2022 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Different types of cells, tissue, and other complex organs together form the human body. Our body releases some chemicals for the effective functioning of the body and to improve biological processes such as respiration, digestion, excretion, and a few other metabolic activities to maintain a healthy life. Hence, enzymes are essential for biological processes in all living organisms. Enzymes can be defined as biological polymers produced by living organism that catalyze the biochemical reactions. They are basically proteins that are produced by living organisms inside the body that help in facilitating certain metabolic and biochemical reactions. These are the biological catalysts that speed up the metabolic reaction inside the body. Enzymes are crucial for metabolic processes and other chemical reactions in the cell. They are necessary for sustaining the life of organisms. Enzymes are catalysts, so they do not involve directly in biological reactions but they help with their efficient occurrence. The metabolic processes depend on the enzymes which react with the molecule and are called the substrate . Enzymes convert the substrates into other distinct molecules known as products . Mostly they are found in all tissues and fluids of the body. The essential and critical life processes are exhibited based on the function of enzymes. The enzymes in the plasma membrane control the catalysis in the cells due to the response of cellular signals and enzymes in circulatory systems regulate the clotting of blood . Structure of Enzymes Enzymes are mostly proteins. They have a primary structure i.e. linear chain of amino acids, which eventually form a three-dimensional shape. An enzyme like any protein has secondary and tertiary structures. In tertiary structure, the protein chains fold upon themselves, and the chain crisscrosses upon itself which creates many pockets or crevices. One such pocket is known as the active site or the substrate-binding site. The substrate fits into a pocket or crevice which is the active site of an enzyme. Thus, the active site of an enzyme catalyzes the biochemical reactions at a high rate. The enzymes are able to break the bigger molecule into simpler molecules or vice versa. Enzymes get damaged at high temperatures above 40 o c and high pressure, resulting in loss of enzyme activity. Thermal stability is thus an important factor of such enzymes. Enzymes are

at a high rate. The enzymes are able to break the bigger molecule into simpler molecules or vice versa. Enzymes get damaged at high temperatures above 40 o c and high pressure, resulting in loss of enzyme activity. Thermal stability is thus an important factor of such enzymes. Enzymes are eventually larger with varying sizes, as compared to their substrate, ranging from 62 amino acid residues to 2500 residues found in fatty acid synthase. These amino acids are liked in a specific way to form different types of enzymes. Only a small part of the entire enzyme structure is used for catalysis and is situated next to binding sites. The enzymes active site consists of both the catalytic site and binding site together. The enzymes also have a site called the inhibitor site. This site is functional when the enzyme is in the inactivated state. The enzymes also have a model of lock and key structure. The active site of an enzyme is flexible and can be modified, and thus can be reshaped based on the interactions with corresponding substrates. What do enzymes do? Enzymes are not living organisms and are a particular type of protein that helps in speeding up the biochemical reaction in our body. Each cell in the human body contains thousands of enzymes. Enzymes provide help with facilitating chemical reactions within each cell. As they are not destroyed during the process, a cell can reuse each enzyme repeatedly. The presence of these enzymes helps in many reactions inside the body that keep a person alive and well. They are important for digestion, oxidation, hydrolysis, respiration, muscle and nerve function, liver function, and much more. Enzymes in our blood assist with healthcare and check for injuries and diseases. Enzymes in our body catalyze all kinds of chemical reactions that include growth, blood clotting, diseases, breathing, etc. Mechanism of Enzyme These enzymes are low-blood protein bodies that are used to catalyze several chemical and biochemical reactions occurring in animal and plant bodies. Without enzymes, the living process will be too slow to sustain life. For example, in the absence of enzymes in our digestive tract, it would take us about 50 years to digest a single meal. Thus enzymes are necessary for life processes. Enzymes have varying sizes of cavities. These cavities are present on the surface of colloidal particles of enzymes. These cavities are of a particular

absence of enzymes in our digestive tract, it would take us about 50 years to digest a single meal. Thus enzymes are necessary for life processes. Enzymes have varying sizes of cavities. These cavities are present on the surface of colloidal particles of enzymes. These cavities are of a particular characteristic shape and they process active groups such as -NH 2 , -COOH, -SH, -OH, etc. The cavities present on the surface of the enzyme are also the active site for biochemical reactions. The reactant molecule or substrate has a complementary shape to the active site or the cavity of the enzyme. They fit together like a key fit into a lock. An activated complex is formed on active groups -NH2, -COOH, -SH, -OH, etc these groups decompose to obtain final products. Thus, the enzyme-catalyzed reactions may be considered to proceed in two steps: Binding reactant to the enzyme to form an activated complex ES. Decomposition of the activated complex to form the product P. Enzyme Mechanism to Reduce Activation Energy Activation energy is needed to break down chemical bonds allowing the reaction to occur. The activation energy describes how quickly a reaction takes place to be spontaneous. Enzymes reduce the activation energy of the reaction by lowering the bond energy of the bond that cannot be broken. By making the bond that cannot be broken higher in energy, it becomes easier to break the bond. When an enzyme binds to a substrate, it lowers the substrate molecules energy to react to form products. Enzymes reduce the size of the reactants and the size of the product, thus lowering the activation energy. They are also used for reducing the activation energy of a reaction in the real world in medicine, food manufacturing, and other industrial processes. They are also used in a wide range of technical processes. Enzymes are very versatile and efficient in nature which results in their application in different fields, they lower the activation energy, but also increase the possibility of the reaction. If the reaction were to happen spontaneously, an enzymes role is to lower the activation energy needed to start a reaction to proceed fastly without a temperature change. Functions of Enzymes The enzyme kinase is commonly used in signal transducing in human bodies. This enzyme catalyzes the phosphorylation of proteins. the enzyme breaks down the large complex molecules into a simpler substances so that

activation energy needed to start a reaction to proceed fastly without a temperature change. Functions of Enzymes The enzyme kinase is commonly used in signal transducing in human bodies. This enzyme catalyzes the phosphorylation of proteins. the enzyme breaks down the large complex molecules into a simpler substances so that the body can absorb them easily. Enzymes are used in the synthesis of energy in our body, ATP synthase is the enzyme commonly used in this process. They carry out the transfer of ions across the plasma membrane. Enzymes perform a number of functions and reactions like oxidation, reduction, and hydrolysis. They are essential for digestion liver function and other bodily functions. Enzymes catalyze all the reactions involved in growth, blood coagulation, healing, breathing , reproduction , etc. They reorganize internal cellular structures for better cellular activities. Lock and Key fit Hypothesis For any reaction to occur there should be interaction or collision among the two molecules in the right direction and sufficient energy. The energy between the molecules should be more than the barrier in the reaction. This energy is called activation energy. Enzymes are said to be the active site which is a part of the molecule with a definite shape and the functional group for the binding of reactant molecules. When a molecule binds to the enzyme it is termed a substrate molecule. The enzyme and substrate together form the intermediate reaction with low activation energy without any catalysts. Enzymes help to reduce the activation energy of the molecules in the reaction. The enzyme-substrate reaction can be better explained with the lock and key structure mechanism. The enzyme is represented by the lock whereas the substrate represents the key. Each substrate belongs to a particular enzyme. Lock and Key fit Model The enzyme-substrate reaction can be expressed with this common equation. i.e. Substrate Enzyme Substrate Enzyme Product Enzyme or the intermediate Product Enzyme. The main function of enzyme action is to catalyze chemical reactions. The binding of the substrate with the active site of the enzyme results in enzyme reactions, the active site is a specific area that combines with the substrate. Induced fit Hypothesis The substrate gets attached to the enzyme which has a specific structure that can only be fitted in a particular enzyme. In Induced fit, the active site is not exactly complementary to the substrate but changes shape in the presence of a

that combines with the substrate. Induced fit Hypothesis The substrate gets attached to the enzyme which has a specific structure that can only be fitted in a particular enzyme. In Induced fit, the active site is not exactly complementary to the substrate but changes shape in the presence of a specific substrate to become complementary and initiate the reaction. When a substrate molecule interacts with an enzyme, if its composition is specifically correct, the shape of the enzymes Active site will change so that the substrate fits into it and an Enzyme Substrate complex can be formed. After the reaction, an Enzyme-Product Complex is formed. The enzyme slows down the activation energy of the reaction by providing a surface to the substrate. The intermediate state where the substrate binds with the enzyme is called the transition state. The enzyme and substrate form bonds and then breaks them, which results in a product and later they split into product and enzyme. The enzymes then bind to other substrates the cycle continues till the reaction is completed. When the substrate S binds to its active site with the enzyme E, a complex intermediate ES is developed which produces the product P and the enzyme. The steps included in enzyme actions are: Step 1: The enzyme and substrate combine and result in an intermediate substrate. Step 2: The detachment of complex molecules gives the product and enzyme. The entire catalyst reaction of enzymes can be expressed as: E S ES E P Induced-fit Model Question 1: Explain the enzyme Ribozymes. Answer: Ribozymes are basically molecules of ribonucleic acid, which catalyze the biochemical reaction in one of their own bonds or among other RNAs. They belong to the class RNA catalyst. Question 2: How do enzymes work? Answer: For any reaction to occur energy is required. Enzymes act as catalysts and help reduce the activation energy of the complex molecules and carry forward the reaction. The following steps simplify the working of the enzyme. Step 1: Each molecule has an active site where one of the substrate molecules can bind to and form an enzyme-substrate complex is formed. Step 2: This enzyme-substrate molecule form an end product from the substrate and the enzyme is liberated to react with another substrate molecule. Question 3: Describe the important properties of enzymes. Answer: Enzymes act as biological catalysts and speed up the rate of reaction. They convert

enzyme-substrate complex is formed. Step 2: This enzyme-substrate molecule form an end product from the substrate and the enzyme is liberated to react with another substrate molecule. Question 3: Describe the important properties of enzymes. Answer: Enzymes act as biological catalysts and speed up the rate of reaction. They convert one form of energy into a more useful form of energy required for the reaction. Cofactors are the molecules that help the enzymes to carry forward the reaction. Enzymes are highly specific, a particular enzyme binds to a particular substrate and catalyzes a single reaction. They are mostly chains of amino acids or proteins, but some RNA molecules ribozymes can also act as catalysts. Question 4: State the uses of enzymes. Answer: Alcoholic Beverages are prepared by different enzyme actions. The use of various enzymes on different plant products creates a variety of fermented product Daily consumable food products are created with the help of enzymes. The finest example of fermentation is Bread. It occupies its texture due to the use of enzymes during the fermentation process. Enzyme action can be promoted by the use of drugs that tend to work around the active sites of enzymes. Question 5: How enzyme works? Answer: Enzyme accelerates the time of the reaction and changes the substrate into the product. The working of enzymes is explained by 2 hypothesis: Lock and Key Hypothesis Induced Fit Hypothesis Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Factors Affecting Enzyme Activity D dibendu26nov Follow Improve Article Tags : Class 11 School Biology School Learning Biochemistry Biology-Class-11 1 More

Difference Between Feed-Forward Neural Networks and Recurrent Neural Networks Last Updated : 06 Jan, 2023 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Pre-requisites: Artificial Neural Networks and its Applications Neural networks are artificial systems that were inspired by biological neural networks. These systems learn to perform tasks by being exposed to various datasets and examples without any task-specific rules. In this article, we will see the difference between Feed-Forward Neural Networks and Recurrent Neural Networks. Feed-Forward Neural Networks The feedforward neural network is one of the most basic artificial neural networks. In this ANN, the data or the input provided travels in a single direction. It enters into the ANN through the input layer and exits through the output layer while hidden layers may or may not exist. So the feedforward neural network has a front-propagated wave only and usually does not have backpropagation Recurrent Neural Networks The Recurrent Neural Network saves the output of a layer and feeds this output back to the input to better predict the outcome of the layer. The first layer in the RNN is quite similar to the feed-forward neural network and the recurrent neural network starts once the output of the first layer is computed. After this layer, each unit will remember some information from the previous step so that it can act as a memory cell in performing computation Feed-Forward Neural Networks vs Recurrent Neural Networks The below table provides a quick comparison between feed-forward neural networks and recurrent neural Networks Comparison Attribute Feed-forward Neural Networks Recurrent Neural Networks Signal flow direction Forward only Bidirectional Delay introduced No Yes Complexity Low High Neuron independence in the same layer Yes No Speed High slow Commonly used for Pattern recognition, speech recognition, and character recognition Language translation, speech-to-text conversion, and robotic control Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article Differences Between Bayesian Networks and Neural Networks K khurpaderushi143 Follow Improve Article Tags : Data Mining data mining Neural Network

What is an Ecosystem? How do Human Beings influence Ecology? Last Updated : 15 Apr, 2025 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report An ecosystem is defined as a community of living things, composed of non-living components that interact with each other. An ecosystem is a structural and functional unit of ecology in which living organisms interact with each other and with the environment. In other words, an ecosystem is a chain of interactions between an organism and its environment. All plants and animals in certain areas are interrelated and also interdependent on each other and their dependence on the environment is known as an ecosystem. Ecosystem Structure Of Ecosystem The structure of an ecosystem is characterized by the organization of both biotic and abiotic components. This includes the distribution of energy in the environment. This also includes the climatic conditions prevailing in a particular environment. The structure of the ecosystem can be divided into two main components. Biotic Components Non-Biotic Components Biotic and Non-Biotic components are interconnected in an ecosystem. It is an open system through which energy and components can flow across boundaries. Functions of Ecosystem The ecosystem performs the following functions: Regulates basic ecological processes, supports life systems, and ensures sustainability. It is also responsible for the nutrient cycle between biotic and non-living components. Balances the different nutrient levels in an ecosystem. Ensures mineral circulation in the biosphere. Non-living components aid in the synthesis of organic components that enable energy exchange. Thus, the functional units of an ecosystem, or functional components that work together in an ecosystem, are: Productivity Represents the rate of biomass production. Energy flow is a sequential process in which energy flows from one trophic level to another. Solar energy flows from producers to consumers, to decomposers, and finally to the environment. Decomposition is the process by which dead organic matter decomposes. Topsoil is the main decomposition site. Nutrition cycle- In an ecosystem, nutrients are consumed and reused in different forms for use by different organisms. Links Between Ecosystems And Human Activities We managed to control fires, farm, and build vehicles. Weve built factories, dams, and solar panels, and were constantly looking for new ways to explore space. Nevertheless, mankinds desire to use, modify and transform natural ecosystems seems to be endless. Turning plains into grain fields, for example, will dramatically change the local ecosystem. Sometimes we change it completely from its original

factories, dams, and solar panels, and were constantly looking for new ways to explore space. Nevertheless, mankinds desire to use, modify and transform natural ecosystems seems to be endless. Turning plains into grain fields, for example, will dramatically change the local ecosystem. Sometimes we change it completely from its original basis. Human activity today is having a huge impact on ecosystems, so were talking about the Anthropocene timeline. This is a period that determines the significant impact of human activities on the Earths atmosphere , biosphere, and geological and hydrological systems. This period also takes into account changes due to climatic events that are primarily caused by human activities. We see all these changes everywhere. When trees are cut down in the Amazon forest, species struggle to survive, and the ecosystem changes with local humidity and climate change . Dam construction also changes the distribution of water and affects the species that live around rivers. A commonly used example of how human activity affects ecosystems is Yellowstone National Park, USA. Here, as in other national parks, the US Department of Biology has decided to kill wolves and other species as a means of controlling predators. The problem is that in the long run, the disappearance of the wolf population affects the entire ecosystem and also changes the flow of local rivers. About 70 years later, wolves were reintroduced into the park to restore balance to the ecosystem. Effects of Human Activities on the Ecosystem The effects which human activities have on the ecosystem include: Over Population Survival meant population growth. However, the reverse is also quickly true as the planet reaches the maximum capacity it can handle. Overpopulation has turned into a contagious disease with a decrease in mortality rate, advances in medicine, and the introduction of industrial agriculture, prolonging the lifespan of human life and increasing the total population. The consequences of overpopulation are very serious, and one of the most serious is the destruction of the environment. Whether agricultural or industrial, people need a lot of space, and they also take up a lot of space. Population growth leads to clearer cuts, causing serious damage to ecosystems. Without enough trees to purify the air, CO₂ levels can rise, damaging all organisms on the planet. Another problem is that it relies on coal and fossil fuels for energy. The larger the population, the more fossil fuels are used. The

leads to clearer cuts, causing serious damage to ecosystems. Without enough trees to purify the air, CO₂ levels can rise, damaging all organisms on the planet. Another problem is that it relies on coal and fossil fuels for energy. The larger the population, the more fossil fuels are used. The use of fossil fuels such as oil and coal releases large amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, threatening the extinction of thousands of species, and exacerbating the already impacts of deforestation. Humanity constantly needs more space. This destroys ecosystems and increases CO₂ levels, further destroying the vulnerable environment. Recycled materials are needed to power cities, but previous estimates suggest that the planet could suffer such damage before it does us any harm. Pollution Pollution is almost everywhere. From garbage dumped on highways to the millions of metric tons of pollutants released into the atmosphere each year, its clear that pollution and waste are inevitable. Pollution is so great that 2.4 billion people today do not have access to clean water sources. Humans are constantly polluting irreplaceable resources like air, water, and soil, and it takes millions of years to replenish them. Air is probably the most polluted, generating 147 million metric tons of air pollution annually in the United States alone. In 1950, when the smog in Los Angeles became so strong, ozone an atmospheric gas present in the atmosphere rather than on the ground exceeded 500 parts per billion volume ppbv. 75 ppbv more than 6.6 times to be precise. People thought they were under foreign attack because the smog burned snow and left a bleach smell in the air. It was then that the destructive effects of aerosols were discovered. Global Warming Global warming is probably the biggest cause of environmental impact. The largest contributors to CO₂ levels, from respiration to more harmful sources such as fossil fuel burning and deforestation. Anyway, people are constantly increasing CO₂ levels worldwide every year. Before 1950, the highest level of CO2 in human history was about 300 ppm. However, current measurements of CO₂ levels exceed 400 ppm, cancelling all records from 400,000 years ago. The increase in CO₂ emissions has contributed to an increase in the average global temperature by almost one degree. As temperatures rise, Arctic land ice and glaciers melt and sea levels rise at a rate of 3.42 mm per year, allowing more water to absorb more

from 400,000 years ago. The increase in CO₂ emissions has contributed to an increase in the average global temperature by almost one degree. As temperatures rise, Arctic land ice and glaciers melt and sea levels rise at a rate of 3.42 mm per year, allowing more water to absorb more heat, causing more ice to melt, creating a positive feedback loop. By 2100, the sea will rise 1-4 feet. Climate Change Climate change is closely linked with historical developments in industry and technology. As global temperatures rise, the Earths weather patterns will change dramatically. Some areas will experience longer growing seasons, while others will dry up and become barren wastelands over vast areas, turning once flowering areas into deserts. These increases will affect weather patterns, promising more hurricanes in both size and frequency, exacerbating and prolonging droughts and heat waves. But air pollution doesnt just affect the environment. There is growing evidence that poor air quality and rising temperatures destroy vulnerable ecosystems and even increase the incidence of asthma and cancer in humans. Genetic Modification Genetically modified organisms GMOs have made a significant contribution to the survival and prosperity of mankind. GMOs are crops or selected varieties of crops in which DNA has been directly grafted to the crop to benefit the crop, such as maintaining a lower temperature, requiring less water, or producing more products. However, GMOs are not always intentional. For years, people have been using glyphosate, a herbicide designed to kill weeds, the biggest threat to all plants. Superweeds threaten farmland by dumping outcrops. One of the only solutions is to turn the soil over to kill weeds and start planting crops early. However, the downside of plowing is that it makes the soil dry faster, kills beneficial bacteria, and significantly shortens the fertile lifespan. Fertilizers are used to replenish depleted soil, which creates entirely new environmental problems and can be catastrophic for local agriculture in the long run. Overfishing Pollution is the biggest threat to all aquatic life and a major cause of biodiversity loss. This is truly unfortunate considering that water and aquatic life are among the most important natural resources we can handle. But, as mentioned above, overfishing also damages our oceans. Fishing itself is not harmful to our seas. However, if not properly regulated, it can harm the oceans and people. The World Wildlife Fund WWF reports that the worlds overfished catches have

among the most important natural resources we can handle. But, as mentioned above, overfishing also damages our oceans. Fishing itself is not harmful to our seas. However, if not properly regulated, it can harm the oceans and people. The World Wildlife Fund WWF reports that the worlds overfished catches have tripled in half a century and that one-third of the worlds estimated fish stocks today are now beyond their biological limits. Moreover, billions of people depend on fish as a source of protein. Acid Rain When people burn coal, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides are released into the atmosphere, accumulating in the clouds until they become saturated and acid rain, destroys the land beneath the clouds. Rain accumulates in water bodies and is particularly harmful to lakes and small bodies of water. The earth surrounding the water absorbs acids, depleting the soil of essential nutrients. Trees that absorb acids accumulate toxins, damaging their leaves and slowly killing large areas of the forest. Deforestation As humanity grows exponentially, more and more food, materials, and shelter are being produced at an incredible rate, primarily through forestry. Forests are cut down to make room for new people, which in turn creates more people who can see problems. International data shows that about 18 million acres of trees are cut down each year to create new developments and wood products. Thats less than half of all the trees on the planet since the start of the Industrial Revolution. Since trees are one of the biggest producers of oxygen, this is clearly not good for humans, especially the animals that call forests home. Because forests are home to millions of diverse species, deforestation is a major threat to their survival and a major conservation challenge. It also increases the number of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, further exacerbating global warming. Such human activities must cease if we are to survive. Whats more, recent studies have linked deforestation with increased wildfires in areas like the Amazon. Wildfires displace both people and species, destroying more equally. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article What are Environment and Ecosystem? P prachikathuria09 Follow Improve Article Tags : School Geography School Learning Social Science Geography-MAQ

Biofertilizers Last Updated : 31 Oct, 2023 Comments Improve Suggest changes Like Article Like Report Biofertilizers are biologically active substances that help in enriching the soils fertility. Biofertilizers are microbes or microbial products. It helps to reduce the use of chemical fertilizers. Reducing the use of chemical fertilizers from the environment biofertilizers helps to protect the ecosystem. Biofertilizers are economical, effective, and renewable sources of plant nutrients. Table of Content What is Biofertilizer? Features of Biofertilizers Types of Biofertilizers Components of Biofertilizer Applications of Biofertilizers Benefits of using Biofertilizers Disadvantages of Biofertilizers Types of microbes used as Biofertilizers What is Biofertilizer? Biofertilizers are microbes or microbial products that improve plant growth and yield by supplying essential nutrients to the plant. Unlike chemical fertilizers, which are synthetic and often toxic, biofertilizers are made up of living microorganisms that are either naturally occurring or specially selected for their beneficial properties. These microbes have a symbiotic relationship with the plant, and they provide nutrients in a form that the plant can absorb. Biofertilizers mostly include living organisms which include mycorrhizal fungi, blue-green algae, and bacteria. Also, Read: Nitrogen Fixation Features of Biofertilizers Some of the important key features of the biofertilizers are; Biofertilizers are mainly microbes like bacteria, fungi, algae, etc. They help the soil to become nutrient-rich. The organisms involved are mostly responsible for nutrient cycling . Biofertilizers also include biological substances obtained from various organisms. It does not cause toxicity to soil and water bodies. It helps in organic farming. Also, read: Organic Farming Types of Biofertilizers Some of the common types of organic biofertilizers are; Loose Association of Nitrogen-Fixing Bacteria Nitrogen-fixing bacteria loosely associate with plant roots, using them for food and shelter. Examples include Azotobacter, Beijerinckia, and Clostridium. This process converts atmospheric nitrogen N 2 into ammonia NH 3 , which can then be converted into nitrates NO 3 that can be used by plants, improving soil fertility and increasing crop yields. Symbiotic Nitrogen-Fixing Cyanobacteria Symbiotic cyanobacteria like Nostoc and Anabaena fix atmospheric nitrogen and have symbiotic relationship with plants like legumes, ferns, and mosses. The plant provides the bacteria with carbon and other nutrients, while the bacteria provide the plant with nitrogen. This relationship is crucial for both the plant and the bacteria, as it helps the plant to obtain the nitrogen it needs for growth, while also providing the bacteria with the resources they need to survive.

bacteria with carbon and other nutrients, while the bacteria provide the plant with nitrogen. This relationship is crucial for both the plant and the bacteria, as it helps the plant to obtain the nitrogen it needs for growth, while also providing the bacteria with the resources they need to survive. Also Read: Eubacteria Free-Living Nitrogen-Fixing Bacteria Free-living nitrogen-fixing bacteria like Azotobacter, Clostridium, and Klebsiella convert atmospheric nitrogen into a form that plants and many other organisms can use by the process of nitrogen fixation. This helps maintain the nitrogen balance in ecosystems and improve crop yields. Symbiotic Nitrogen-Fixing Bacteria Plants have a beneficial relationship with symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacteria like Rhizobia and Bradyrhizobium. These bacteria are found in the root nodules of legume plants and turn nitrogen in the air into a nutrient that the plant can use. In return, the plant provides the bacteria with carbon and other nutrients. This relationship is great for plants growing in nitrogen-poor soil, improves soil quality, and reduces the need for nitrogen fertilizer. Components of Biofertilizer Following are the components of biofertilizers are: Bio Compost Biocompost is a nutrient-rich product made from the digestion of organic matter through an anaerobic process by microorganisms like bacteria, fungi, and actinomycetes. It improves soil fertility, structure, and water-holding capacity while releasing plant nutrients and improving soil health. However, over-fertilization and contamination must be avoided by choosing high-quality compost. Tricho-Card Tricho-Card is a blend of beneficial microbes, including Trichoderma fungi that improve plant growth, suppress plant diseases, improve root development, and enhance nutrient availability in soil. Its easy to use, safe for the environment, and can increase crop yields while reducing reliance on chemicals. Azotobacter Azotobacter is a type of nitrogen-fixing bacteria that improves soil fertility, supports plant growth, and increases yield. Its added to soil in powder or liquid form, and mixed with water before application. Benefits include increased crop yields, reduced reliance on chemical fertilizers, and safety for humans, animals, and the environment. Phosphorus Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for plant growth and soil fertility. Biofertilizers containing it can enhance plant processes and increase crop yields. The benefits include improved water-holding capacity, soil fertility, and reduced reliance on chemical fertilizers. Vermicompost Vermicompost is an organic plant fertilizer made by earthworms digesting organic matter. Its rich in nutrients like nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and helpful microorganisms, improving soil fertility and crop yields. Its eco-friendly and free of synthetic

The benefits include improved water-holding capacity, soil fertility, and reduced reliance on chemical fertilizers. Vermicompost Vermicompost is an organic plant fertilizer made by earthworms digesting organic matter. Its rich in nutrients like nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and helpful microorganisms, improving soil fertility and crop yields. Its eco-friendly and free of synthetic chemicals. It is a very environmentally friendly option. Applications of Biofertilizers Following are some of the common applications of biofertilizers; Seed treatment: Biofertilizers can be applied to seeds before planting to provide early access to essential nutrients and establish healthy root systems. Soil drench: Biofertilizers can be applied directly to the soil around the base of the plant, where they can be absorbed by the roots to be absorbed easily. Foliar spray: Biofertilizers can be sprayed on plant leaves for quick and efficient nutrient absorption, especially for crops with larger leaves. Its also useful for stressed crops to aid in quick recovery. Irrigation water: Biofertilizers added to irrigation water can provide essential nutrients directly to the plant roots. Composting: Biofertilizers can enhance compost decomposition and increase nutrient content. Adding biofertilizers to compost piles speeds up decomposition and boosts nutrient availability for plants. Intercropping: Biofertilizers can increase the productivity of intercropping systems by promoting the growth of multiple crops as they enriches the soil with nitrogen. Crop rotation: Biofertilizers maintain soil health and fertility in crop rotation systems by inoculating the soil with useful microbes. Greenhouse cultivation: Biofertilizers include beneficial microorganisms that can be used in greenhouse cultivation to improve soil health and fertility, resulting in stronger, healthier plants that are more resistant to disease and pests. Reforestation: Biofertilizers aid reforestation by improving soil health and fertility with the help of useful microbes. Urban agriculture: Biofertilizers can improve crop growth and soil health in urban agriculture by reducing the need of synthetic fertilizers. Also Read: Irrigation Benefits of using Biofertilizers Some of the important benefits of biofertilizers are; They are eco-friendly and made of living microorganisms. They help in reducing the risk of soil and water pollution The help to improve soil fertility. They are cost-effective alternatives to chemical fertilizers that can be produced locally. They improve soil fertility, reduce reliance on synthetic fertilizers, and promote sustainable agriculture, and soil productivity. They provide essential nutrients in a form that can be easily absorbed thus improving the yield. They can enhance soil health by promoting a diverse community of microorganisms and increasing

can be produced locally. They improve soil fertility, reduce reliance on synthetic fertilizers, and promote sustainable agriculture, and soil productivity. They provide essential nutrients in a form that can be easily absorbed thus improving the yield. They can enhance soil health by promoting a diverse community of microorganisms and increasing organic matter content. Disadvantages of Biofertilizers Some of the common disadvantages of using biofertilizers are; Microbial growth and multiplication takes time so biofertilizers have slow action. They are host specific and can be beneficial for certain types of crops. They may not work well in extreme temperatures, pH levels, and moisture conditions. They have a limited shelf life and must be stored in proper conditions to maintain their effectiveness. The introduced microbes may compete with native soil microbes for nutrients and other resources, leading to a reduction in their effectiveness. They can be expensive to produce and distribute, which can make them less accessible to farmers in developing countries. There is a lack of standardization in the production and labeling of biofertilizers, which can lead to quality control issues and inconsistent results. Types of microbes used as Biofertilizers The most common types of microbes used as biofertilizers are; Rhizobia: Rhizobia are bacteria that live in nodules on legume plant roots. They convert atmospheric nitrogen into a form the plant can use, which improves soil fertility and reduces the need for synthetic nitrogen fertilizers. Azotobacter: Azotobacter is a nitrogen-fixing bacteria found in soil, water, and plant surfaces. It can provide nitrogen to non-legume crops and produce plant growth-promoting compounds. Azospirillum: Azospirillum is a bacterium that promotes plant growth by fixing atmospheric nitrogen and enhancing root development. Its often used with other biofertilizers to improve soil fertility. Mycorrhizae: Mycorrhizae is a symbiotic association between fungi and plant roots that improves the plants nutrient and water absorption. It also helps to improve soil structure, suppress plant diseases, and increase plant growth. Bacillus subtilis : Bacillus subtilis is a soil bacterium that improves soil structure, suppresses plant diseases, and boosts plant growth by producing antibiotics and growth-promoting compounds. Pseudomonas fluorescens: Pseudomonas fluorescens is a bacterium that can enhance plant growth and suppress diseases by producing antibiotics and growth-promoting compounds like hormones and vitamins. Trichoderma: Trichoderma is a soil fungus that suppresses plant diseases, improves soil fertility, and promotes plant growth by producing antibiotics and releasing nutrients. Comment More info Advertise with us Next Article

